  
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GOA  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
POST GRADUATE MANUAL  
 
  
Ph.D. Rules and Regulations   
The Institute offers facilities for work leading to Ph.D. in various research areas. IIT Goa  offers a 
Ph.D. Programme in a wide range of areas in Engineering, Science, and Humanities and Social 
Sciences from the academic year 2018 -19. The broad objectives of the Ph.D. programme are: to 
keep pace with the expanding frontiers of knowledge and to pr ovide research training relevant to the 
present technical, scientific, social and economic technological and scientific objectives of the 
country. The academic programme leading to the Ph.D. degree is broad based. It will involve a 
minimum course credit re quirement and a research thesis. The institute will also encourage research 
in interdisciplinary areas through a system of joint supervision and interdepartmental group activities. 
The presence of a strong research -oriented faculty provides excellent oppor tunities for such 
programmes. The Institute intends to undertake sponsored research and development projects from 
industrial and other organizations in the public and private sectors. Facilities for research work 
leading to the Ph. D degree will be made av ailable in all the Science, Engineering and Humanities 
and Social Sciences departments/schools. In addition to the facilities available in the laboratories 
and workshops of his/her own department/school, a Ph.D. scholar will have an access to the central 
facilities available elsewhere in the Institute also. Several Departmental and Institute level seminars 
will be held throughout the year. A large number of distinguished scientists and engineers both from 
India and abroad, will be invited to visit the Insti tute to deliver lectures and hold discussions with the 
research groups. The Ph.D. student thus will get ample opportunities to pursue their research 
programmes in a truly stimulating environment. Extracts of the Rules and Regulations governing the 
Ph.D. pr ogramme are given below:  
  
Eligibility for Admission R.1  
a) A Ph.D. student will be considered by the Senate to be eligible for registration for Ph.D. on 
applying in the prescribed form provided he/she has obtained M. Tech/ ME/ M. Sc. (For 
Engineering) de gree or an equivalent qualification by virtue of an examination.   
  
R. 2   
a) The Degree of Ph.D. may be conferred on an Ph.D. student subject to the following conditions:  
i) Research work has been carried out under the guidance of Supervisor(s) for at least two 
years in the case of all Ph.D. students after their date of registration.  
ii) The thesis submitted by the Ph.D. student is required to be recommended for the award of 
the Ph.D. degree by two external referees (one Indian and One Foreigner) and by the Board 
of Examiners constituted for the viva voce examination.  
iii) Notwithstanding the provision of R.2 (a), a Ph.D. student may be permitted to carry out a 
part or whole of resear ch work outside the Institute in a factory, laboratory, workshop, 
worksite or other research centres duly approved for the purpose by the Institute.  
  
R.3  
The degree of Ph.D. shall not be conferred as an ad eundem degree (to one whose actual work was 
done elsewhere). The Student has to spent minimum stipulated time in the Institute for award of 
Ph.D. degree.  
  
R.4  
Notwithstanding the provisions of R.1, the Senate will consider the registration for the Ph.D. degree 
of a Ph.D. student who has obtained the  B.Tech./M.Sc./M.A. degree or an equivalent qualification 
by virtue of an examination in a subject duly approved by the Senate and has successfully completed 
the minimum prescribed credit requirements under an approved programme of studies.  
  R.5  
Researc h Assistant / Teaching Assistants or any other duly approved category of Institute Staff may 
be registered for the Ph.D. degree under the provisions of R.1/ Part Time / Self Finance / Sponsored 
(table).  
  
 
Registration   
  
a. On joining the Institute every Ph.D. student is required to plan his/her academic programme in 
consultation with a Supervisor of academic Unit (Department/School/Centre) in which the Ph.D. 
student is admitted. Details of the academic requirements of this p rogramme and details of 
courses available are given in the bulletin which will be available in due course.    
  
b. The registration for each semester is carried out through the Registration programme. This 
registration is mandatory for all Ph.D. students, and  they must register themselves on the 
prescribed dates announced from time to time. Every Ph.D. student must register in each 
semester until he/she completes the programme.   
  
c. All Ph.D. student have to clear the Institute and Hostel dues before Registrati on.  
  
  
d. IIT Goa follows a semester system, hence registration at the beginning of each semester is 
mandatory for every Ph.D. student till completion of the programme of study. If a Ph.D. student 
does not register in a particular semester without prior per mission of the Doctoral Committee 
(hereafter will be referred as DC), he/she ceases to be a Ph.D. student and the admission is 
liable to be cancelled. Further, if an Ph.D. student does not register for two consecutive regular 
semesters, the admission will be cancelled by the DC Suo moto (on its own motion).   
e. The Supervisor is authorized to carry out the course registration and also adjustments as 
specified later.  
  
f. Along with the credit courses, an Ph.D. student in consultation with the Supervisor is norm ally 
allowed to register for a maximum of TWO Audit course per semester, with the consent of the 
Ph.D. Supervisor and /or the Convener of the concerned Academic Unit. The registration for 
this is also to be done in consultation with the Faculty Advisory Gr oup/ Supervisor and at the 
same time as for the credit courses.  
  
g. An Ph.D. student is not permitted to reregister for a course, which he/she has undergone and 
in which he/she has secured AU, DD or higher grades.  
  
  
h. An Ph.D. student who concurrently regi sters for any postgraduate degree at another 
organization shall be automatically deregistered at the Institute.  
  
i. Registration will be confirmed only after submission of final year mark sheets/provisional 
certificates of their qualifying degree by the Ph.D. students  
  
i. All Ph.D. students should ordinarily submit their certificates within the Academic Calendar when 
admitted in the Autumn / Spring Semester, of a given academic year, respectively, after joining 
the Institute.  
  
ii. The Ph.D. students who are unable to submit t heir certificate to Academic Section as prescribed 
in Academic Calendar, should apply for extension along with an undertaking stating the due 
date for submission, giving proper reasons on prescribed form to be developed for the purpose.  
  iii. Even if an Ph.D.  student does not submit the certificate until the commencement of the 
Semester end examination, he /she would be allowed to appear in the examination. However, 
the results of such an Ph.D. student shall be withheld until the required documents are 
produce d.  
  
iv. Cases of Ph.D. students who do not submit the certificates after the first semester will be 
reported to the DC and the Chairman, Senate for further consideration and decisions/actions.  
 
Course Adjustments   
  
Within the period prescribed in the Academic Calendar, an Ph.D. student can substitute one or more 
courses by others. For this purpose, the Ph.D. student has to carry out Course Adjustment in 
consultation with his/ her Faculty Advisory Group.  
  
6. Admissi on  
  
R. 6.1: Admission Categories  
  
Ph.D. student Status: The Status of the Ph.D. students admitted to the Ph.D. programme shall be 
classified under any one of the following categories:  
  
A. Fulltime Ph.D. student   
  
i) Teaching Assistantship (TA)  
ii) Teaching  Assistantship through  Project (TAP)  
iii) Govt./Semi Govt. Fellowship Award (FA) QIP, CSIR -JRF, UGC -JRF, DAE,  DST-INSPIRE ,  
      DBT, NBHM, etc.)  
iv) Sponsored / Self Finance  
  
For more details regarding the above categories, kindly refer Ph.D. information brochure on Institute 
website.   
  
  
B. Part time Ph.D. student   
Teacher  
External  
   
R.6.2: Registration/Temporary Withdrawal from/Leaving the Programme  
  
a) If an Ph.D. studen t leaves the programme any time within the first two years without prior 
permissions of the Senate, he/she would forfeit his/her Ph.D. student status.  
  
b) If an Ph.D. student withdraws from his/her Ph.D. programme any time without intimation (within 
the fir st two years) after admission, his/her Ph.D. student status ceases and he/she would not 
be readmitted with any weightage for the credits acquired the period of stay.  
  
c) In case a Ph.D. student wishes to withdraw from registration with prior permission of 
Supervisor/DPGC/CS, he/she may do so only after a period of two years after the date of 
Confirmation of Registration  with prior permission of the Chairman, Senate. The application 
for temporary withdrawal must be endorsed by the Ph.D. Supervisor(s) and the RC of the 
Institute.  Temporary withdrawal could be granted for, up to one year (two semesters) initially. 
Extensio n of the duration of withdrawal beyond the period of one year would normally not be 
encouraged, and could be granted by the Senate on recommendation by the RC, only under circumstances which the RC deems to be genuinely extraordinary. The period of tempora ry 
withdrawal will not be counted, when counting the number of semesters of Ph.D. registration 
already completed by the Ph.D. student.   
   
7. Eligibility for Admission   
  
R.7.1.: a) Minimum Qualification for Admission (General eligibility criterion for Ad mission in 
all Academic Units).  
  
For more details regarding the above, kindly refer Ph.D. Information Brochure on Institute Portal 
(http://iitgoa.ac.in/phdadmission.php )  
  
b) Award of M.Phil. Degree to the Ph.D. students from Science and Social Science Stream   
  
An Ph.D. student who has earned 34 credits through coursework during the Ph.D. Programme may 
be permitted to register for the M.Phil. /MS (R). Programme. This is permitted in the Departments of 
Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics and Humanities & Social Sciences. To obtain an M.Phil. / MS (R) 
degree the Ph.D. student must successfully complete one year of project work leading to the 
disserta tion.   
  
c) Award of M.S. by Research to the Ph.D. Ph.D. students from the Engineering Stream   
  
A student pursuing the Ph.D. Programme in an Engineering discipline and who has successfully 
completed minimum credit requirement of course work may be permi tted to register for the M.S. 
Programme by Research leading to a dissertation. The total duration of M.S. Programme will be 2 -3 
years.   
  
Procedures for Exit option from Ph.D. Programme to M.S. By Research   
  
1. If DC decides to recommend discontinuation of Ph.D. with an option of conversion to M.S. 
(Research) then the Ph.D. student will be informed accordingly.   
  
2. The Ph.D. student should apply for conversion within a month, along with a work plan and 
proposed t imelines for the completion of M.S. (Research) / M. Phil degree, through the Supervisor.   
  
3. If the Ph.D. student applies, and the work plan and timelines are approved by the DC then the 
Ph.D.  
is discontinued and converted to M.S. (Research).   
  
4. If no re sponse received by the Ph.D. student within a month from the DC may recommend 
discontinuation of his/her Ph.D., without the option of conversion to M.S. (Research).   
  
Procedures for Evaluation of the M.S. Thesis   
  
1. The M.S. by research theses shall be s ent only to one referee out of 2 or 4 referees.   
  
2. On receipt of favourable report (i.e. `a' or `b') from the referee and comments of supervisor/Internal 
Examiner there on, permit the Ph.D. student to appear in the viva -voce examination Only one 
review by  external examiner shall be considered for holding of M.S. by research viva -voce.     
3. However, if the examiner recommends minor modifications in the thesis (i.e., `c'), the viva -voce 
can be held only after the Internal Examiner certifies that the changes have been carried out.   
  
4. If the referee recommends major revisions in the thesis (i.e ., 'd'), the revised thesis should be 
submitted within 6 months after incorporating the revisions to the satisfaction of the supervisors 
and internal examiner. This will then be sent for further review.   
  
5. If the referee recommend rejection (i.e. `e'), an  option of a second referee will be sought.   
  
6. If again referee recommend rejection of thesis, the thesis in the current form is rejected. In such a 
case, a new thesis may be submitted only once for review, after 1 year and not later than 2 years 
from the  date of intimation by the RC.   
  
  
R.7.2:  Concurrent registration of any PG degree at another Organization by any Ph.D. student  
Any Ph.D. student who concurrently registers for any Ph.D. at another organization shall be 
automatically deregistered  at the Institute.  
  
8. Pattern of Courses and Credits   
The courses offered for the Ph.D. Programmes may be: Lecture Courses, Laboratory Courses, 
Design Courses, Seminars, courses pertaining to Communication skills.  
  
R.8.1: Course Credit Structure  
  
The credit for a course depends upon the contact hours and self -study hours associated with it and 
is obtained by adding all these hours. The credits for all the available courses are indicated in the 
Courses of Study available on the web page of Dean AP. There is a provision for the Ph.D. students 
to credit courses from NPTEL or MOOC under special circumstances after the approval from the 
Chairman Senate.   
R.8.2: Credit Seminar  
A Seminar shall satisfy the following conditions: 
a)  Each seminar shall carr y four credits.  
b) The Seminar shall be treated as a course for the purpose of registration and evaluation.  
c) The Seminar coordinator appointed by the DC (Departmental Committee) shall arrange the 
seminars and forward the grades awarded by the panels of exami ners to the Academic Office 
by the end of the semester.  
d) A Ph.D. student shall not take more than two Seminars during the entire Ph.D. Programme.  
  
R.8.3 Communication Skills I & II courses (PP/NP course)   
  
a) These courses are compulsory for all Ph.D. stu dents.  
  
1. Ph.D. students are normally required to clear the Communication Skills course within the 
first year.  
  
2. These courses are additional to the minimum course credit requirement prescribed by the 
DC.  
  b) Exemption from doing Communication Skill course may be given to those Ph.D. students who 
have completed their qualifying degree programme with Communication Skill course from an IIT. 
This exemption shall be given only if the Communication Skill course had been completed in the 
last five years of his/her joining the Ph.D. programme.  
  
R.8.4 Requirement of number of students in a semester   
  
To be revised    
  
9. Course Credit requirements and Registration for courses   
  
All Ph.D. students in the Ph.D. programme are required to acquire the prescribed credits through 
course work, which shall normally be completed:   
  
a) Within one year from the date of joining by the Ph.D. students having M.Tech./M.Sc. or 
equivalent qualifica tion.  
  
b) Within the first two semesters from the date of joining by the students having B.Tech./M.S./M.A./ 
M.Sc. equivalent qualification. However, the duration could be extended with permission from 
the Chairman, Senate.  
  
Ph.D. students will be allowed to complete extra credit courses, if necessary.   
  
R.9.1: Applicable to Ph.D. students with M. Tech. or equivalent degree   
  
a) The credit requirements for Ph.D. students having M. Tech./M.Phil . or equivalent qualification, 
will be a minimum of  16 credits , i.e., 2 courses and a seminar and maximum of 22 credits . 
The courses could be taken in any academic unit of the Institute (Department/ School/Centre).   
b) The Ph.D. students may earn up to a maximum of 4 credits through seminars.    
c) Ph.D. students with an M.  Tech. degree who have been admitted to the Ph.D. Programme 
should also undergo at least two courses at the M. Tech./ Ph.D. level in addition to the Seminar 
requirements.   
d) The Ph.D. students may earn maximum 6 credits through online NPTEL or MOOC courses  
  
R.9.2: Applicable to Ph.D. students with M.Sc./M.A. or equivalent degree and admitted to Ph.D.  
programme in Science discipline .  
  
a) The credits requirements for Ph.D. students having M.Sc./M.A. or equivalent qualification 
admitted to a Science Department/School shall be 34 to 46 credits  and will be 16 credits for 
HSS The courses could be taken in any academic unit (department/school/Ce ntre) in the 
Institute.  
b) Credits acquired through PG level courses shall be 24 or more (minimum 4 courses).  
c) The Ph.D. students may earn up to a maximum of 8 credits through Seminars, which should be 
spread over two semesters.  
d) The Ph.D. students may earn credits through online NPTEL or MOOC courses as decided by 
the DPGC  
  
R.9.3.: Applicable to Ph.D. students with B. Tech or equivalent degree and M.Sc. or equivalent 
degree admitted to Ph.D. programme in Engineering discipline.  
  
a) The credits requirements for Ph.D. students having B. Tech or equivalent qualification or M.Sc.  degrees or equivalent qualifications admitted to the Ph.D. programme in any one of the 
Engineering disciplines shall be 44 to 56 credits .   
b) The Ph.D. students may earn up to a maximum of 8 credits through Seminars, which should be 
spread over two semesters.  
c) Credits acquired through PG level courses should be 3 or more. A minimum of 3 PG level 
courses should be completed for credit requirements.  
  
  
R.9.4: Minimum/Maximum Course credit registration in a Semester  
  
The Fulltime -Ph.D. students register through their respective Supervisor(s) for not less than 18 
credits in the first Semester of the course programme if the total credits required are 18 o r more. 
Other Ph.D. students with course credits requirements below 18 credits shall register through the 
Supervisor(s) for the entire prescribed credits in the first Semester itself.  
  
R.9.5.: Extension for Commencement of Coursework  
  
Ph.D. students wh o are unable to commence their course programme during the Semester in which 
they have been admitted should apply to DC/DPGC/CS and obtain permission to commence their 
course work in the following semester.  
  
R.9.6: The procedure for registration of cours es shall be as follows:  
  
a) The Ph.D. students, after payment of prescribed semester fees, complete their registration 
online in consultation with the Supervisor(s) and the academic unit. Such registration is required 
to be approved by his/her Supervisor.   
b) The Ph.D. students, in consultation with the Supervisor, can carry out course adjustment within 
the time limit provided in the Academic Calendar.  
c) The DC shall finalize the course programme of the Ph.D. students in consultation with the 
Supervisor(s).  
d) Recommendations, if any, about reduction of course credits shall be sent to RC by in the 
beginning of I or II semester along with the applications for registration for due approval.  
e) The Academic Office shall inform the DC of any discrepancy in the Registrat ion. However, the 
Ph.D. students should ensure on their own that they comply with the credit requirements listed 
under the rules prescribed above.   
f) The DPGC shall approve the course programmes of all Ph.D. students after due scrutiny.  
  
R.9.9: Adjustment of Course(s)  
  
An Ph.D. student can add to his/her academic load, one or more courses not registered for earlier 
or substitute one or more courses by others by filling the Course Adjustment Form, within the first 
two weeks from the comme ncement of classes provided the course credit requirements as 
prescribed under R.9.1, R.9.2, R.9.3 remain unchanged.  
  
R.9.10: Dropping of course(s)  
  
An Ph.D. student may drop courses for which he/she may have registered if the academic load for 
the giv en semester is found to be too heavy (Course Dropping Form). Such dropping is permissible 
till the date as given in the academic calendar provided the credits requirements laid down in R.9.1, 
R.9.2, R.9.3 are not violated.     
R.9.11: Duration for Dropping  of course(s)    
  
The last date for dropping a course by an Ph.D. student will be two weeks after the mid -semester 
examination for the semester -long courses and one week after the mid -semester examination for the 
half-semester courses. The last date for co urse drop will be included in the Academic Calendar.  
  
Note: The Ph.D. student shall complete the prescribed Course Adjustment Form (CAF) and Course 
Dropping Form (CDF) in consultation with the Supervisor.  
  
  
R.9.13 Grade Improvement   
  
1. An Ph.D. studen t in a Ph.D. Programme, where minimum CPI for coursework is 6.0, will be 
eligible for repeating/replacing a course for grade improvement if he/she has a CPI less than 
6.0 and has been permitted by DC to continue in the Programme on Academic Probation.  
2. For Grade improvement, an Ph.D. student has to reregister in the course in a subsequent 
semester if the course is offered. The grade obtained in the reregistered course will supersede 
the earlier grade and the same will be reflected in the Semester Grade C ard and in the Final 
Transcript.  
3. The Ph.D. student can avail this option only for TWO (02) courses in the programme and only 
ONCE for a specific course.  
  
10. Course Assessment and Award of Grades   
  
R.10.1: Grade Points  
  
For every course taken by the Ph.D. student, he/she is assigned a grade based on his/her combined 
performance in all the assessments. These grades are described by the following letters and 
corresponding grade points. AA (10 points), AB (9 points), BB (8 points), BC (7 points), CC (6 p oints), 
CD (5 points), DD (4 points), and FF (0 points), FR (0 points), PP (Passed, 0 points), NP (not Passed, 
0 points), AU (Passed, 0 points) DX (0 points).  
Minimum passing grade in a course is ‘DD’. Some courses are only associated with PP/ NP 
grades. In such courses, satisfactory completion is indicated by the award of the PP grade.  
The minimum passing grade for all UG and PG courses is DD. However, PG Ph.D. students should 
acquire a minimum CPI of 6.00 at the end of each semester . All grades (includi ng FR, DX etc.) 
obtained by an Ph.D. student will be mentioned in the transcript.    
  
R.10.2: Failure Grades  
  
The letter grades FF and FR shall be treated as failure grades. Re -examination may be permitted 
for a course if the Ph.D. student obtains FF grade. After such re -examination if the Ph.D. student 
passes in that course, he/she will be awarded the maximum gra de of ‘DD’  in that course. If an 
Ph.D. student does not take or fails in the re -examination, he/she will be awarded the grade FR  
  
FR grade  will be awarded in case(s) where, in the opinion of the Instructor (panel of examiners in 
case of the Projects), th e Ph.D. student has inadequate academic exposure to the course/has very 
poor performance in the in -semester and/or end -semester examinations.  
  A Ph.D. student getting a FR grade has to reregister for the same course if it is a core subject. If this 
cours e   is   an   elective   course, he/she   may   register   for   an alternative course as prescribed, 
without this being counted as an additional course.    
  
An Ph.D. student who obtains a fail grade in a course more than once, the grade points/credits will 
figure only once in the numerator as well as denominator, respectively, for the purpose of SPI/CPI 
calculations.  
   
R.10.2.1: 'FR' grade for Academic Malpr actice   
  
‘FR’ grade may also be awarded for Academic malpractices. Details pertaining to Academic 
malpractices are available on the institute website. Academic Malpractices are severely dealt with 
as per the norms of IIT Goa.  
  
R.10.3: Re -examination in  a course  
  
An Ph.D. student will be permitted to take the re -examination for a course where he/she has an FF 
grade provided the number of failed backlog courses (with FR grade) does not exceed the limit 
permitted, i.e., at most two during the entire prog ramme.  
  
  
R.10.4: Audit Course  
  
The Ph.D. students registered for auditing a course shall be awarded the grade AU if they fulfil the 
requirement of a minimum of 80% attendance and duly satisfactory in -semester performance as 
prescribed by the Instructo r. The Instructor shall include such AU grades in the final grade report for 
that course. If the Ph.D. student does not qualify for the grade AU, it will be assumed that the course 
has been dropped by that Ph.D. student and the semester grade card issued a ccordingly.  
  
R.10.5: Additional Learning   
  
The Ph.D. students have an option of taking a course as ‘Additional Learning’. These courses will be 
in addition to the minimum course credit requirement and will not affect the SPI/ CPI, but the actual 
grades  obtained will be shown in the grade card and transcript. There will be onetime option of 
changing the type of a course. Registration for additional courses will require approval of the 
supervisor/DPGC. The option of permitting Ph.D. student to register a course as ‘Audit’ is left to the 
course instructor.  
  
R.10.6: I Grade (Incomplete)  
  
The grade II shall be awarded to an Ph.D. student in a lecture/ laboratory course if he/she has 
satisfactory in -semester performance and has fulfilled the attendance req uirement, but has not 
appeared for the semester -end examination. The Ph.D. student will be eligible for a makeup for the 
semester -end examination if the absence was due to medical reasons or extraordinary 
circumstances. For re -examination, the Ph.D. studen t will have to apply to the Academic Office. In 
case of absence due to medical reasons, the application should be accompanied by a medical 
certificate issued/ authenticated by IIT Goa Hospital. In case of absence due to extraordinary 
circumstances, the sup porting documents should be submitted. The Academic Office will decide whether re -examination is to be allowed, after consulting with RC (in case of medical reasons) and 
Dean AP (in case of extraordinary circumstances). In case a re -examination is allowed and is 
conducted, the instructor shall decide the final grade on the basis of sum of in -semester and the re -
examination marks. The weightage of the re -examination would be the same as that of the final 
examination that the Ph.D. student has missed. In all other cases the II grade will be converted to 
FR grade.  
  
R.10.7: Seminar Grades  
  
For the Ph.D. students who have submitted the seminar report in time, but the evaluation of which 
however could not be completed in time, the Seminar Coordinator shall award the grade I and shall 
forward the grade report to the Academic Office before the e nd of the semester. All such I grade 
shall be converted to FR letter grades in due course of time, before one month following the end of 
the semester.  
  
R.10.8: Non -submission of Seminar Report/Absent for Presentation  
  
If an Ph.D. student either does no t submit his seminar report by the prescribed date or he/she is 
absent for presentation on the scheduled date he/she shall be awarded FF grade unless he/she is 
given extension by the DC under exceptional circumstances.   
  
R.10.9: Award of Grades in Semina r after obtaining 'FF' in earlier presentation.  
  
All Ph.D. students who get FF grade in Seminar shall be allowed to complete the evaluation during 
the period earmarked for re -examination and will not be given a grade better than the minimum 
passing grade , DD.  
  
R.10.10: Class Attendance Rules   
   
A minimum of 80 % attendance is mandatory in all the classes.   
  
The Instructor may decide the attendance rule and announce it in the beginning of the course. It may 
be a system of giving a percentage weight in  Ph.D. student performance evaluation in the course, 
reserved specifically for attendance and/or class participation. Penalties in attendance and/or class 
participation should be reflected only in this component of Ph.D. student performance evaluation. 
The percentage weight for this 'Class Participation' Component should range from 0 to 20 percent. 
Assigning a zero percent weight for Class Participation automatically implied the earlier   
  
The Ph.D. student would be deregistered from those courses in which  they were absent in any one 
of the first three lectures.   
  
11. Performance requirements in course work for qualifying to register for Ph.D. degree    
  
R.11.1: Required to maintain a minimum CPI of 6.00 at the end of each Semester  
The performance of an Ph.D. student in a semester is indicated by a number called the Semester 
Performance Index (SPI). The SPI is the weighted average of the grade points obtained in all the 
courses taken by the Ph.D. student during the semester.    
Examp le: Suppose in a given semester, an Ph.D. student has taken five courses having credits C1, 
C2, C3, C4, C5 and his/her grade points in those courses are G1, G2, G3, G4, G5 respectively. Then 
his/ her  
  
𝑆𝑃𝐼=𝐶𝐼𝐺𝐼+𝐶2𝐺2+𝐶3𝐺3+𝐶4𝐺4+𝐶5𝐺5
𝐶1+𝐶2+𝐶3+𝐶4+𝐶5 
                         
SPI will be calculated (after re -examination, if any) on the basis of the final grades awarded AA, AB, 
BB, BC, CC, CD, DD and FR. The SPI is calculated up to two decimal places. An up -to-date 
assessment from the time the Ph.D. student entered the Institute is obtained by calculating a number 
called the Cumulative Performance Index (CPI). The CPI is the weighted average of the grade points 
obtained in all the courses taken by the Ph.D. student since he/she entered the Insti tute. It is 
calculated in the same manner as the SPI.   
  
R.11.2: For Ph.D. students with credit requirement of 16 to 22 credits  
  
i) In the first semester, if an Ph.D. student fails in only one course and obtains the grade FF, 
he/she can avail of a re -exami nation in that course at the end of first semester. However, if 
he/she obtains more than one FF grade or an FR grade, he/she is not entitled for a re -
examination.  
ii) The credit requirement as prescribed by the DPGC must normally be completed at the end of 
the first semester but can be extended beyond the first semester if additional courses have been 
prescribed.  
  
  
R.11.3: For Ph.D. students with credit requirement of more than 22 credits  
  
i) An Ph.D. student must not obtain a failure grade (FR) for more than one course in his/her entire 
course programme, else he/she has to quit the programme.  
ii) In a semester, if an Ph.D. student fails in only one course and obtains the grade FF, and if 
he/she h as not obtained a failure grade (FF or FR) in the first semester then he/she can avail of 
a re-examination  in that course at the end of that semester. However, if an Ph.D. student obtains 
more than one failure grade, than he/she is not entitled for a re -examination and he/she has to 
quit the programme.  
iii) In a given semester, if an Ph.D. student fails in only one course and obtains the grade FR (after 
a re-examination, if any), and if he/she has not obtained a failure grade (FF or FR) in an earlier 
semester t hen he/she will register either for the same course or for an alternative course in the 
next semester, as prescribed by the DPGC.  
iv) The credit requirement as prescribed by the DPGC must normally be completed by the end of 
the second semester.  
  
R.11.4: Ph. D. students who obtains FF/FR grades as enumerated in R.11.2 & 11.3  
  
All categories of Ph.D. students not fulfilling the requirements as enumerated in R.11.2 and R.11.3 
are liable to discontinue their Ph.D. programme. The DPGC will take a decision in thi s regard after 
reviewing the cases of such Ph.D. students.   
  
  R. 11.5: Compulsory requirement for Confirmation of Ph.D. Registration  
  
Some academic units (departments/schools) prescribe qualifying examinations for the Ph.D. 
programme. These must be co mpleted successfully prior to confirmation of registration. A Ph.D. 
student has to qualify in the comprehensive and obtain a letter grade.  
  
R.11.6: Confirmation of Registration  
  
Ph.D. students who successfully complete their course credit requirements in one/ two semester 
shall be granted registration from the beginning of the semester in which they complete the course 
credit requirements or from the date of joining the programme, whichever is later.  
  
  
R.11.7: Additional courses after the confirmation of Registration  
  
All Ph.D. students may be allowed to register for extra credit courses, after confirmation of registration 
by following the present rules for confirmation of registration i.e. SPI/CPI abo ve 6.00, etc.  a) The 
present procedure for confirmation of registration will continue.  
b) Extension of registration beyond the duration as specified in the rules will not be considered due 
to registration for extra credit courses.   
  
R.11.8: Confirmation  of Ph.D. Registration Date  
  
Registration dates of all Ph.D. students shall be decided by the DC. The final approval to the 
registration shall be granted by the Senate.  
  
R.11.9: Confirmation procedure  
  
The procedure for confirmation of Registration s hall be as follows:  
i. Each Ph.D. student, on completion of the course requirements and Qualifying Examination 
prescribed by RC shall apply for confirmation of Registration.  
ii. The completed application form shall be forwarded by the RC which will consider thi s application 
and confirm the date of registration according to the rules, as applicable.  
  
R.11.10: Academic Probation to the Ph.D. students having marginally lower SPI/CPI than the 
minimum required for continuation of their studies  
  
For Ph.D. students who are identified by RC as ineligible for continuation of the Ph.D. Programmes, 
the following opportunity is available:  
  
a) RC will directly offer academic probation to the Ph.D. students who are found eligible as per the 
norms defined b y RC, without waiting for the appeal from the Ph.D. student. However, the 
necessary declarations from the Ph.D. students would still be taken as per requirements in a 
reasonable time, after grant of probation.  
b) In some cases, wherein, DC does not offer Pro bation to an Ph.D. student, an appeal can be 
made for probation to DPGC by the Ph.D. students, which DC could consider on a case by case 
basis on its merit.  c) Academic probation will be a one -time exercise during the study programme of the Ph.D. 
students fo r the period of one semester and decided by DC in consultation with the Faculty 
Advisor/Supervisor  
.   
d) For the Academic Probation Semester, the Ph.D. students must obtain such SPI as to make 
his/her course work CPI greater than or equal to 6.0 immediately  (excluding the 
dissertation/project work) on including the performance of the semester of Academic Probation.  
  
 e)  Financial Support during the period of Academic Probation in Ph.D. Programmes   
i. The Ph.D. students who are under Academic Probation may c ontinue to be paid Teaching 
Assistantship at the rate applicable to them.  
  
ii. However, no Teaching Assistantship duties should be given to them on account of the need 
for them, to concentrate on their academic performance and to improve the same.  
iii. Therefore , these Ph.D. students would be expected to pay Non -Concessional Fees 
applicable to Ph.D. students of their academic programme.  
  
7. Supervisor/Co -supervisor   
  
R.12.1: Selection of Research topics, areas of Research  
  
In each Department/School/Centre, applicants will be given, at the time of selecting the details of 
various research topics, areas proposed by various faculty members for Ph.D. programmes, so that 
they will have an opportunity to discuss those topic areas with the respective faculty members and 
thereafter, submit supervisor selection form  The applicants shall then be interviewed by a committee 
constituted by the RC.  
  
R.12.2: Assignment of Research Supervisor  
  
The Research Programme and the specific are a of research of a selected Ph.D. student shall be 
finalised by his/ her Supervisor (s) after mutual discussion. All Research Scholars should be finally 
assigned to Research Supervisor (s) at the time of confirmation of Registration.  
  
R.12.3: Change of R esearch Supervisor  
  
a) Change of Supervisor(s) under exceptional circumstances shall be permitted on 
recommendation of the DC /DPGC after obtaining the consent of (i) the Ph.D. student (ii) the 
present Supervisor(s) and (iii) the proposed Supervisor(s).  
b) If the research programme and/ or area of the work requires modification due to this change, 
the  
Ph.D. student’s entire course programme requirement shall be examined by the DC. If there is 
a change in the research programme and/or area of the work, the registration date may be 
revised, if found necessary.  
  
R.12.4: Arrangement of Temporary Research Supervisor when the Main Supervisor is on leave  
  
a) Whenever a Supervisor leaves the Institute permanently or temporarily for a period greater than 
or equal to six months, the DC shall provide new supervisor(s) for the Ph.D. students being 
supervised by him / her before his/her departure. The DC may consider continuation of the 
original Supervisor on his/her return to the Institute, as Co -Supervisor of his/her Ph.D. students depending on the period for which he/she has supervised the Ph.D. Programmes of the P h.D. 
students concerned  
b) Whenever a Supervisor leaves the Institute temporarily for a period less than one year, the The 
supervisor will assign a co supervisor or an Administrative supervisor. The DC shall make aa 
arrangement for the guidance of his/her Ph .D. students with permission of the DC  
  
c) Any such arrangement made shall be forwarded to DC/ DPGC/Supervisor for prior approval and 
the decision shall be communicated to the concerned Ph.D. student.   
  
R.12.5: Number of Ph.D. students assigned to the Sup ervisor   
  
At any given time, the number of Institute Ph.D. students (TA/RA/ part -time/ Sponsored) working with 
a supervisor shall not exceed 02(two) in each category.  However, the DC can decide on the total 
number of Ph.D. students of all categories work ing with him/her.  
  
R.12.6: Doctoral Committee (DC)  
  
After the completion of the specified course requirements by a candidate, the Supervisor will 
constitute a Research Progress Committee (RPC) for all candidates in consultation with the 
Supervisor and DPGC The DC will normally consist of the Supervisor & Co -Supervisor, a Chairman 
of the committee from the department (if any) and one  other faculty member conversant with the 
field of research from the department and external member from other department.   
The names of the DC members and any subsequent changes in its composition shall be 
communicated to the Dean for record.  Normally one of the RPC members is expected to function 
as the internal examiner for the evaluation of the thesis.  
  
The DC is expected to monitor the progress of the candidate until the completion of the programme.  
  
13. Place of work, Progress and Duration   
  
On the recommendation of the Supervisor(s) and the DC the Institute may allow the research work 
for the Ph.D. degree to be partially or wholly carried out at another organization with the following 
provisions:   
  
13.1: External Organization where an Ph.D. student can carry out the Research  
  
a) The external organization where an Ph.D. student wishes to carry out th e research work partially 
or wholly shall have to be recognized by the Institute before such work is undertaken with 
approval from the Chairman Senate.  
  
b) An external organization may be granted recognition by the DC as an approved place of work.  
i) The reco gnition shall normally be given only for the purpose of the individual research project 
by a particular Ph.D. student.  
ii) The details of research facilities available at the organisation shall be furnished by the Ph.D. 
student along with the application for admission to Ph.D. programme.  
iii) The RC shall examine the details given and may decide either to ask for further information, 
or even collect first -hand information, if necessary, by deputing faculty member(s) to visit the 
organisation. Only when the RC is f ully convinced about the adequacy of the research 
facilities and the credentials of the external supervisor, it shall recommend the case to the 
RC.    
R.13.2: Annual Progress Seminar (APS)   
  
(i) All Ph.D. students are required to submit a report (APR – Annual Progress Report) and present a 
seminar (APS – Annual Progress Seminar) every year to the research progress committee (RPC) in 
consultation with supervisor and co -supervisor (if applicable ) till successful completion of pre -
synopsis. Individual academic units may consider the last date of APR submission prior to the last 
date of APS presentation.  
  
Following is the schedules of APS presentation.  
  
For students joining in Autumn semester:  Not later than 30 July. For students joining in Spring 
semester: 31st December Failing which he will not be allowed for registration.  
  
Students, who have completed six years are required to present a Progress Seminar biannually till 
the successful compl etion of the pre -synopsis.  
  
To suit the specific requirement of a funding agency, students may apply to the convener, DC for a 
different but fixed schedule (for every year) for APS presentation.  
  
R.13.3: Requirement for Continuation in the Programme/Sc holarship  
  
a) All Ph.D. students registered for Ph.D. irrespective of their category, shall have to register every 
semester  along with a brief report on the work done in the earlier semester(s) and a plan for the 
ensuing semester  
b) All candidates, after join ing, shall submit, through the supervisor(s), an APS of their work in the 
previous academic year to the concerned DC once a year in July/January depending upon the 
time of admission. For all categories of Ph.D. students, this seminar must be given on or be fore 
30th July or 31st December of each year except for the following:  
  
In case of CSIR/UGC/INSPIRE/DBT or similar fellows, the dates of their APS should be fixed by 
considering the requirements of the funding agency and such a fixed schedule shall be followed 
strictly.  Regular research scholars are liable to lose their finan cial support if the seminar is delayed 
beyond the said dates. Such seminars are required to be given (every year) until the synopsis and 
thesis is submitted.   
  
This is also required for enhancement of assistantship and for confirmation/continuation of th eir 
programme.  
  
The following guidelines are being followed for avoiding delays in the presentation of the Annual 
Progress Seminar:  
  
1. Every Ph.D. student must present the Annual Progress Seminar as per the prescribed schedule 
every year after the SOTA.  
2. In case, due to some valid reasons, if he/she is not able to present Annual Progress Seminar in 
time, an application for extension must be made at least 15 days before the due date of 
presentation.  
3. Extension will be granted by the Dean on case to case ba sis from 1st September/1st February 
as the case may be, till the date of presentation of APS.  4. The report of the Annual Progress Seminar in a prescribed format should reach the Academic 
Office within four days after the presentation.  
5. Delay beyond 30th July/31st December (as applicable) may lead to discontinuation/cancellation 
of Teaching Assistantship and/or Registration.  
6. The assistantship for the period beyond the due date of renewal/enhancement of Assistantship 
will be released only after receipt of sat isfactory report.  
  
The continuance of registration of all Ph.D. students is subject to satisfactory progress made 
by them .  
   
The above rules are also applicable to CSIR/UGC/INSPIRE/DBT or similar fellows, the date of 
their APS be fixed by considering r equirements of funding agencies and such fixed schedule 
be followed strictly.   
  
R.13.4: Minimum Period of Research for Submission of Thesis from the date of confirmation:   
  
All Ph.D. students (except external Ph.D. students)  have to carry out research in the Institute for at 
least a period of two calendar years from the date registration after completion of the Qualifier before 
submission of thesis. External Ph.D. students have to carry out research for at least a period of three 
calendar years from the  date of registration  before submission of thesis (after completion of the 
Qualifier/Comprehensive exam)  
  
R.13.5: Period of Validity of Registration of the Ph.D. Programme  
  
 For all categories of Ph.D. students, the period of validity of their Ph.D. registration is six years from 
the date of registration. The Ph.D. students may submit their thesis before the end of this period 
subject to the provisions of R.13.4.   
  
R.13.5 a) : Registration of Ph.D. programme beyond Five years  
  
Ph.D. Ph.D. students who have been registered for five or more years in the Ph.D. programme are 
required to submit a properly completed application on the approval form, for extension of Ph.D. 
registra tion to the subsequent year in the Ph.D. programme. This application must be completed and 
submitted on or before the last date for completing the Annual Progress Examination for the year 
prior to the year for which extension of Ph.D. registration is requi red.   
  
R.13.6: Procedure to be adopted by Ph.D. students for research work involving human 
participation  
  
Ph.D. students whose research work involves human participation (either directly or indirectly), 
should obtain IIT Goa Institute Ethics Committee (IEC) approval prior to start of the study or the 
component of the study involving human participation. IEC approval is mandatory for all such 
projects. In fact, this is mandated by several funding agencies also e.g. DST, DBT, CSIR and ICMR. 
IEC approval i s also a prerequisite for such research work to be published in peer reviewed journals 
of repute. IEC approval cannot be taken retrospectively.  
  
R. 14 Synopsis and Thesis submission and Evaluation   
  R.14.1: Pre -synopsis Seminar and Examination  
  
The DC  will assess the work in consultation with the supervisor(s). The panel must comprise of at 
least two faculty members other than the Supervisor(s). These will include RPC members.  
  
a) This panel will assess the work through a pre -synopsis seminar and report . The Ph.D. student 
can submit the synopsis only if the panel is satisfied about the quality and quantity of the work for 
submission as a Ph.D. thesis.  
b) Details of the pre -synopsis seminar will be notified so as to enable interested staff members 
and Ph.D.  students to attend.  
c) The Convener of the DC will forward the panel reports to the Academic Office through DPGC 
in the format prescribed for Pre -Synopsis Examinations. List of Publications/ Conference arising out 
of the thesis/other outcomes, if any, are t o be submitted along with the Pre -synopsis report.  
d) Ph.D. students should submit their synopsis and thesis within three months of the Pre -synopsis    
seminar date. If the synopsis and thesis are not submitted in the specified period, the Ph.D. student 
will be asked     to present the pre -synopsis seminar ag ain.  
  
R. 14.2: Submission of Synopsis and Thesis  
  
R.14.2.1: Format of synopsis and thesis  
  
The synopsis & thesis should be written in the approved format.  
  
  
R.14.2.2: Submission of no of copies of synopsis and thesis  
  
Two copies of synopsis should be submitted to the RC and 4/5 copies of thesis to the Academic 
office along with the prescribed forms for submission and certificates from the Accounts Section and 
the Hostel that there are no dues against the Ph.D. student. After approval of the RC, the synopsis 
will be forwarded to the Academic Office along with the forms and the required certificates.  
  
R.14.2.4 Patent is being/ has been filed.   
  
At the time of Synopsis/Thesis submission, the Supervisor should select one of the following options 
for evaluation of the thesis (included in the Form for submission of synopsis & thesis): 1) The thesis 
evaluation be processed immediately.  
OR  
2) The processing of the thesis evaluation be taken up after a communication from the 
Supervisor or six (06) months (whichever is earlier), as a patent is being /has been filed 
and there is a need to maintain the confidentiality of proprietary information.  
OR  
3) The thesis be sent for evaluation after the Non -Disclosure Agreement has been signed 
by the examiner, and there is a need to maintain the confidentiality of proprietary 
information. The Ph.D. student has been informed that obtaining NDA from prospective  
examiners may delay the thesis evaluation.  
  
R.14.2.5: Required Certificates for submission of Synopsis & Thesis  
(included in the Form for submission of synopsis & thesis)     
a) Certificate from the DC that the pre -synopsis seminar examination has been co mpleted 
satisfactorily.  
b) Certificate from the Ph.D. student and Research Supervisor(s) confirming (i) that there is a prima 
facie case for consideration of the thesis, (ii) that the thesis does not contain any work which 
has been previously submitted for t he award of any degree except to the extent of collaboration, 
if any, which may then be specified.  
c) Certificate of authorization from the Research Supervisor(s) for submission of the thesis.  
d) Certificate from the Deputy Registrar (Academic) that the prescr ibed course credits are 
completed.  
  
R.14.3: Panel of Referees (External Examiners) for Evaluation of Ph.D. Thesis  
  
R.14.3.1: The Supervisor in consultation with the DC will recommend to the Chairman, Senate, a 
panel of External Examiners (Referees for thesis evaluation) and the Chairperson (2 names) and 
Internal Examiner for the Ph.D. Viva -Voce  (2 names)  
  
The examiners (Referees for thesis evaluation) who are currently evaluating another thesis from IIT 
Goa should not normally be included in the panel.  
  
The thesis supervisor will opt for one of the following schemes (Scheme A or Scheme B) for 
submitting p anel of external examiners.  
  
Scheme A  
• The Supervisor will give at least 8  names of external examiners (with at least 4  names from 
within India) for review of Ph.D. Thesis . The academic office will request the external 
examiners to be reviewers for the t hesis and after receiving acceptance, the thesis will be 
sent to examiners by academic office.  
• The thesis will be sent to only 3 examiners  out of the 8.  
  
Scheme B  
• The supervisor(s) of the Ph.D. student will write to potential examiners (approved by DC)  
asking them about their willingness to examine the thesis, if requested to by the institute. 
The draft text for such communication will be available on the academic homepage. After 
obtaining the willingness of the examiners, 4  names of such examiners (wit h at least 2  names 
from within India) will be recommended by supervisor(s). The DC approved list will be then 
sent to the academic Office.  
• The Thesis will be sent to only 3 examiners out of the 4.  
  
R.14.3.2: Selection of Examiners for evaluation of Thesis:  
  
A) From the panel of external examiners duly approved by the DC, the Chairman, Senate    or his 
nominee will choose 3  names. Additional examiners will be contacted, if the need arises.   
B) The refere es independently send the thesis evaluation report to the Academic Office, including 
following:  
i) A critical survey and evaluation of the quality and quantity of the work as embodied in the 
thesis.  
ii) Questions, if any, to be asked or points to be clarified a t the viva -voce examination, and  
iii) A definite recommendation as to whether the thesis is acceptable for the award of the 
degree of Doctor of Philosophy.  C) If a referee in his/her report is not in a position to make a definite recommendation for the award 
of the degree, he is requested to assist the Chairman Senate in deciding whether the Ph.D. 
student is required to:  
• Make substantial revisions involving rewriting of one or more chapters without, however, 
doing any further research work.  
• Completely rewrite t he thesis, if the thesis, though not acceptable in the present form, 
reveals sufficient quality and quantity of work to warrant the Ph.D. student being given an 
opportunity for further research work and/or reinterpretation of results.  
D) The Internal Examine r of the Ph.D. thesis will be a faculty member of the Institute, who is a 
member of the DC of the concerned Ph.D. student.  
  
R.14.4: Referees Evaluation Reports on Ph.D. Thesis  
  
i. If all the referees recommend acceptance of the thesis as it is (i.e., ‘a’), or with clarifications of 
minor points at the time of the viva voce (i.e., ‘b’), the defence can be held directly. ii.  If 2 out of 3 
referees recommend minor modifications in the thesis (i.e., ‘c’), the defence can be held  only after 
the internal examiner certifies that the changes have been carried out.  iii. If 2 out of 3 referees 
recommend major revisions in the thesis (i.e. ‘d’), the revised thesis should be resubmitted wit hin 
6 months after incorporating the revisions to the satisfaction of the supervisors and internal 
examiner. This will then be sent for further review.   
iv. If one referee recommends rejection (i.e., ‘e’), an opinion of a third examiner will be sought.   
v. If all the 3 referees recommend rejection of the thesis, the thesis in the current form is 
rejected. In such a case, a new thesis may be submitted only once for review, after 1 year 
and no later than 2 years from the date of intimation by the DC, after present ing a pre -
synopsis seminar.   
  
Note: The copies of the referee reports will be made available to the supervisor/Co -Supervisor and 
the FC of the Department with an intimation to the Ph.D. student.   
  
In case of (i)  above, the copies of reports will be sen t to supervisor(s) and Faculty Co -ordinator of 
the department simultaneously along with the intimation of defence approval.  
  
In case of (ii) & (iii) above, the copies of both the reports to be sent to Supervisor/Co -Supervisor for 
ensuring that all the co rrections including minor modifications in the thesis suggested by the external 
referees have been/will be incorporated. After receiving the response of the Supervisor/Co -
Supervisor, the reports of the referees and the responses of the Supervisor/Co -Superv isor will be 
sent to DC to ensure that the corrections including minor modifications, revision suggested by the 
external referees have been/will be incorporated.  
  
The Supervisor/Co -Supervisor and the DC will submit their response within 7  working days fr om the 
date of receipt of the reports/supervisors’ response for consideration and approval by DPGC and 
Chairman, Senate.  
  
The Senate shall, however be the final authority in deciding whether the thesis be accepted 
for the award of the degree.   
  
R.14.5:  Approval of holding the defence and Board of Examiners for Defence. DC will approve 
holding of the viva -voce examination (Ph.D. defence) and Board of Examiners for defence.  
  
An Ph.D. student whose thesis has been accepted for the award of the Ph.D. degree will defend 
his/her work at an open viva -voce examination conducted by a Board of Examiners at the Institute . The Board of Examiners  will be appointed by the Chairman, Senate  and it shall 
consist of:   
i) Chairman of DC will be Chairman of viva -voce committee.  
ii) The research supervisor(s) from the department.  
iii) A faculty member of the Institute conversant with the subject to act as the internal examiner; 
and  
iv) One of the referees, w ho has reviewed the thesis (failing which one faculty member from 
outside the department).  
  
a) An external examiner, from among the approved panel of examiners, is required in the Board of 
Examiners for the Ph.D. viva -voce Examination. The Chairperson of th e Ph.D. viva -voce 
examination panel will certify the acceptance of the Thesis and successful conduct of the Ph.D.  
viva-voce Examination.  
b) The Board of Examiners will submit its report in the prescribed form to the Senate.  
  
R.14.6: Defence Report  
  
a) On satisfactory completion of the viva -voce examination, the degree may be conferred upon the 
Ph.D. student after approval by the Senate.  
b) If a thesis has been accepted but the Ph.D. student fails at the viva -voce examination, he/she 
may be permitted by the Se nate Chairman to reappear for viva -voce examination again at a 
later date. The recommendations of the Board of Examiners conducting the viva -voce 
examination will be considered in taking a decision in this respect.  
  
R. 14.7: Submission of Final copies of Thesis   
  
a) After successful completion of the Ph.D. Viva -voce examination, the Ph.D. student will submit to 
the Academic Office the final bound hard copies & CD soft copy and one copy to Library, of 
his/her approve d thesis, along with the prescribed form, within one month from the date of 
defence.  
  
15. Teaching Assistantship   
  
R.15.1: Rate of Assistantship  
  
The Institute Ph.D. students will be paid scholarship at a rate in accordance with the directives from 
the appropriate authorities.  
  
R.15.2: Tenure of Assistantship  
  
Institute Ph.D. students are eligible to receive Assistantship for a maximum period of  FIVE years as 
communicated by the MHRD .   
  
R.15.3: Enhancement of Assistantship  
  
a) All Institute research scholars shall apply for enhancement of Assistantship two weeks before 
completion of two years from the date of joining. They shall submit five typed copies of summary 
of their work described in five to six pages, to the Chairman, DC .  
b) Subject to satisfactory assessment, the candidates will be eligible for enhanced Assistantship 
after the completion of two years from the date of joining.  c) If in the opinion of the committee, the enhanced Assistantship cannot be recommended, the 
committ ee may stipulate a period of time, not less than three months, for the candidate to 
reappear before the committee for the consideration of enhanced Assistantship.  
d) Continuation of Teaching Assistantship until the period of entitlement.  
The Ph.D. students with Teaching Assistantship/ Fellowship/ Financial Support routed through 
the Institute who submit their thesis before the stipulated period of 5 years, may continue to 
avail of their financial support until the date of their Ph.D. Viva Voce Examination or  the end of 
the period of their entitlement, whichever is earlier.   
The Dean/ Supervisor of the concerned Department/School may recommend such cases by 
certifying the needs in consultation with the Ph.D. Supervisor(s).   
  
R.15.4: Award of Teaching Assist antship to Ph.D. student with B. Tech from IITs without GATE 
requirement:  
   
TA ship will be awarded to the Ph.D. student admitted with a B. Tech qualifying degree from the IITs 
without GATE requirements provided the candidates had a CGPA/CPI greater than  or equal to 8.00 
on a 10 -point scale in their B. Tech degree.    
16. Leave Rules   
 R.16.1:  
  
All Ph.D. students are entitled for leave for a maximum of thirty days per year in addition to Public 
Holidays. Also 10 days leave on medical reasons is permitte d.    
R.16.2:  
 Women Scholars are entitled for maternity leave  at the full rate for a period not exceeding 180 days, 
once during the tenure of their Ph.D. studentship. This should be supported by a medical certificate.  
  
R.16.3:   
 Male Scholars are entitled for 15 days’ paternity leave  once during the tenure of their Ph.D. 
studentship.  
This should be supported by a medical certificate.  
The Dean or Chairman of DC is authorized to sanction the above leave.  
    
R.16.4:  
 No vacation in Summer/Winter is admissible.  
 R.16.5:   
  
Special Leave to attend Seminars/Conferences in India/abroad to present research papers, with the 
permission of the Dean of Academic Programmes, is admissible.  
  
  
R.16.6:   
  
Ph.D. students under CSIR/UGC and other categories are governed by the rules of the bodies which 
provide financial support.  
 