Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) Manual
Version 1.6 /one.sup
Indian Institute of Technology Goa
1Last modiﬁed on December 8,2020;Proposed by the SPGC convened on November 18,2020;Incorporated
comments from the open faculty meeting held on October 22, 2020 and Institute Coordination Committee
meeting held on November 25, 2020.Preamble
Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Goa’s vision is to become a unique institution of higher
learning which shall oﬀer state of the art education, research, and training in science,
technology,humanities and social science sto leave a footprint on society and environment
by addressing global and local challenges. The presence of dynamism and the rigour in
faculty members at IIT Goa to pursue research has led to the Ph.D.program across various
disciplines in the institute. IIT Goa,ever since its inception in 2016 has been establishing
modern research facilities and extensively expanding its infrastructural facilities have given a
push for the Ph.D. program which was approved by the Senate of IIT Goa in its first meeting
itself. The objective of the Ph.D. program is to leave that footprint as envisioned by IIT Goa.
A Ph.D. degree is awarded as a recognition for the achievements of independent research
and application of knowledge to the solution of technical and scientiﬁc problems. The
academic program shall lead to the degree by meeting criteria set by the Senate,IITGoa. This
is achieved by securing credits through course-work and research. The admission to the Ph.D.
program is through a centralised process of the institute. Although the students are admitted
to certain schools, IIT Goa encourages interdisciplinary research. The institute has been
actively involved in various sponsored projects from government as well as industrial support.
IIT Goa extends all the facilities for doing path breaking research across all ﬁelds of science,
technology,humanities and social sciences. The student has access to all facilities with in and
outside the school in which the student is enrolled. The institute has several Memorandum of
Understanding(MoU)signed with various institutes and national laboratories within India
and abroad,which allows the student to work elsewhere for part of the research. IITGoa
invites distinguished personalities from diﬀerent ﬁelds and also organizes various events
like workshops,symposium and conferences. These events encourage the student to engage
in stimulating discussions which will contribute toward the irsound development. IITGoa
also extends its support toward non academic development by providing opportunities to
explore the ir extra-curricular interests through various clubs. Psychological and emotional
support services are also provided for the needy students. In other words,IITGoa extends
and tries to provide the best possible environment for excelling in the research path chosen
by the student enrolling for the Ph.D. program.
iiThis manual is a guiding document for the fascinating journey the student has decided to
undertake. The rules and regulations have been laid out with least possible ambiguity. The
manual may evolve with changing times as and when necessary. This manual is prepared
by the Senate Postgraduate Committee (SPGC) appointed by the Senate, IIT Goa. It has
been their best eﬀort to provide maximum liberty to students as well as faculty for a smooth
conduct of the program.
Currently running Ph.D. program The Senate, IIT Goa in its ﬁrst meeting held on 30
January 2018 under the chairperson-ship of Prof. B. K. Mishra approved the Ph.D. program
in the following disciplines.
•Chemistry
•Computer Science and Engineering
•Economics
•Electrical Engineering
•Mathematics
•Mechanical Engineering
•Language and Literature
•PhysicsAcknowledgements
This manual is an adaptation of Ph.D. rules and regulations implemented in various eminent
institutes in India and abroad. We thank them to make them available online.
We acknowledge the efforts of the following faculty and staff members who spent their
valuable time on discussion and composing the ﬁrst version of this manual.
•Dr. Sunil Paul, Humanities and Social Sciences
•Dr. Shiv Parsad, Mathematics and Computer Science
•Dr. Shakthi Prasad D., Electrical Sciences
•Dr. Santosh Kumar Das, Physical Sciences
•Ms. Sadhana Soni, Academic Programs and Student Aﬀairs
•Dr. E. Siva Subramaniam, Chemical and Material Sciences
•Mr. Dileep Kumar P. S., Academic Programs and Student Aﬀairs
•Dr. Clint P. George, Mathematics and Computer Science
•Dr. Ashish Bhateja, Mechanical Sciences
•Mr. Abhishek Gupta, Academic Programs and Student Aﬀairs
We thank faculty members Drs. Arindam Das, Harpreet Singh, Milind Sohoni, Nan-
dakumar Nambath, Neha Karanjkar, Ponnulakshmi VK, Raja Mitra, Sachin Kore, Sashidhar
Sampathirao, Santosh Kumar, Sharad Sinha, Somenath Biswas, Sudipta Kanungo, Sujit
Kumar Sahoo, Thaseem Thajudeen, Vaibhav Wasnik, and Y. Sudhakar for their reviews and
suggestions on this manual.
ivContents
Preamble ii
Acknowledgements iv
1 Introduction 1
2 Admissions 2
2.1 Admission categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
2.2 Eligibility for admission to the Ph.D. program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
3 Registration and credit requirements 4
3.1 Credit requirements through course-work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
3.1.1 Course registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
3.1.2 Dropping a course . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
3.1.3 Relaxation from course credit requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3.1.4 Crediting NPTEL or MOOC courses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3.1.5 Research communication, ethics, and methods . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3.2 Credits requirements through research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
4 Doctoral committee 10
5 Conﬁrmation of Ph.D. registration 12
5.1 Ph.D. comprehensive examination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
5.2 State of the Art Seminar (SOAS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
6 Annual progress seminar 13
7 Submission and evaluation of synopsis and dissertation 14
7.1 Pre-dissertation seminar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
7.2 Submission of synopsis and dissertation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
7.3 Evaluation of dissertation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
v7.4 Dissertation defence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
8 Performance requirements and remedial tools 19
8.1 Minimum CPI requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
8.2 Failure on courses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
8.3 Grade improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
8.4 Academic probation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
8.5 Termination/Exit from the Ph.D. program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
9 Leave rules 23
9.1 Personal Leave and Casual Leave . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
9.2 Maternity and Paternity leave . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
9.3 Medical Leave . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
9.4 Academic Leave . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
9.5 Absence without sanctioned leave . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
10 Miscellaneous 25
10.1 Change of status from Full-time to Part-time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
10.2 Guidelines for research work involving human participation . . . . . . . . . 25
Annexure I Requirements for students enrolled before AY 2020-2021 26
Annexure II Academic performance index 28
Annexure III Course credit calculation, grading, and types 29
III.1 Credit calculation from contact hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
III.2 Grading system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
III.3 Graduate seminar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
III.4 Self-learning/reading courses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
Annexure IV Credit calculation and grading for NPTEL/MOOC courses 34
Glossary 361
Introduction
This manual gives general guidelines,rules, and regulations for students enrolled in the IIT
Goa Ph.D. program. A Ph.D. degree may be conferred on a student subject to the following:
•The student has completed the minimum credit requirements as prescribed by the
concerned Academic Units (AUs, see Table 3.1).
•The student has carried out research under the guidance of his/her Doctoral Adviser
(s) for at least two years starting from the date of conﬁrmation of Ph.D. registration
(Chapter 5).
The student may be permitted to carry out a part of his/her research work outside
the Institute in an industry, laboratory, workshop, work site, or other research labs
as recommended by the Doctoral Committee (DC) and approved by the concerned
AcademicUnit(AU).If the student leaves the institute for a period of more than two
months an approval from the Senate Postgraduate Committee (SPGC) is required
(details Chapter 9).
•The student’s dissertation must be recommended for awarding the Ph.D. degree by
two external referees from reputed universities or research labs and by the Board of
Examiners constituted for the viva voce (Chapter 7).
This manual follows the new credit hour calculation system /one.sup(SectionIII.1)for courses
and specifying minimum requirements of the Ph.D. program. Students who are already
enrolled may follow the old credit hour calculation scheme for courses; however, mapping to
the new credit system based on contact hours is available in Annexure III.
1The credit system was adapted from the new undergraduate curriculum approved in the 3rd meeting of the
Senate held on June 10, 2019, at IIT Goa
12
Admissions
2.1 Admission categories
Students are admitted to the Ph.D. program through an institute selection process under any
one of the following categories:
Full-Time or Regular Ph.D. student
•Teaching Assistantship (TA): Students get fellowship from the institute as per the
guidelines by the Ministry of Education
•TA through Project(TAP):Students get fellowship from the research project and partial
support from the institute
•Govt./ Semi Govt. Fellowship Awards such as QIP, CSIR-JRF, UGC-JRF, DAE,
DST-INSPIRE, DBT, NBHM, etc.
•Sponsored: A student in this category is sponsored by a R&D organization, academic
institution, government organization, or industry for doing research in the institute on
a full-time basis. The institute does not provide any assistantship/fellowship to such a
student.
•Self-ﬁnanced: A student in this category works full-time or part-time towards the Ph.D.
program. The institute does not provide any assistantship/fellowship to such a student.
Part-Time Ph.D. student A student in this category is a professionally employed person
(including IIT Goa staﬀ), who pursues the Ph.D. program while continuing the duties of the
employment. The institute does not provide any assistance/fellowship to such a student.
•Permanent employees from state or central government universities, colleges, or
research institutes and labs
•External: This category refers to a student employed in an R&D organization/academic
institution/industry having adequate research facilities. The research work leading to
22.2. Eligibility for admission to the Ph.D. program 3
the Ph.D. degree may be carried out largely in the parent organization of the candidate
under a Local Supervisor from the organization but with the overall guidance provided
by a faculty member(InstituteSupervisor)of the AU in which the student is registered.
•Self-sponsored
•Permanent staﬀ of IIT Goa
2.2 Eligibility for admission to the Ph.D. program
Candidates have to fulﬁll the requirements set by the institute. These are: At least First
Divisionor equivalent in M.A./ M.Sc./ B.Tech./ B.E./ MCA/ M.Tech./ M. Phil. or equivalent
degree in appropriate branches. Individual Academic Units (AUs) may use higher cut off
levels and/or other appropriate discipline-wise criteria for shortlisting if required. Candidates
belonging to reserved categories are eligible for relaxations,as per norms,in the selection
criteria.3
Registration and credit requirements
•AllPh.D.students should submit their(original)qualifying degree/diploma certiﬁcates
(QDC) within one year after joining the institute or before the conﬁrmation of
the Ph.D. registration, whichever is earlier. However, students must submit their
provisional degree/ degree completion certiﬁcate (if no QDC available) along with
the degree/diploma transcripts at the time of the admission to the Ph.D.program. In
this case,the student is admitted to the institute provisionally and fellowship will be
withheld until the student’s admission is conﬁrmed. The provisional admission will be
cancelled if QDC is not produced within the stipulated time mentioned above.
–Students who are unable to submit their QDCs to Academic Section within the
due date should apply for extension along with an undertaking stating the new
date for submission, giving proper reasons.
–Students would be allowed to appear in the examination even if they do not submit
their QDCs until the commencement of the end semester examination. However,
the results of such students shall be withheld until the required documents are
produced.
–Students who do not fulﬁll the admission requirements (candidates who are
awaiting results of qualifying exams) as prescribed by the institute, who have
been provisionally selected must submit the provisional certiﬁcates within six
months of joining otherwise their admission will be cancelled.
–Requirements for respective funding agencies will be applicable to student
scholarships
•On joining the Institute every student is assigned to a Faculty Advisor (FA) by the AU
in which the student is admitted. The student must plan his/her academic program in
consultation with the FA.The student should also identify a Doctoral Adviser(DA)
and inform the Academic Oﬃce before the stipulated time (details in Chapter 4).
•All enrolled students must register for courses or research at the beginning of subsequent
semesters through the institute registration program in consultation with their FA/DAs.
4Registration and credit requirements 5
This registration at the beginning of each semester is mandatory for all students,and
they must register on the prescribed dates announced from time to time.
•A student is required to register for a minimum of 12 credits every semester . If the
core and elective courses taken by the student in a given semester are less than 12
credits, the remaining may be taken as research credits (Section 3.2).
•If a student does not register for two consecutive regular semesters , the admission
will be cancelled Suo moto (on its own motion).
•Students must complete the minimum credit requirements through courses and research
as described inTable3.1. Ph.D.students who have been registered for five or more
years in the Ph.D. program are required to submit an application, for extension of
Ph.D. registration to the subsequent year in the Ph.D. program. This application must
be submitted on or before the last date for completing the APS for the year prior to
the year for which extension of Ph.D.registration is required. The financial support
provided to the student will follow the respective rules in place by the funding agency
and/or the institute.
•Students are allowed to register for a maximum of two audit courses per semester,with
the consent of their FA/DA.
•A student is not permitted to re-register for a course, which the student has undergone
and in which the student has secured an Audit or a Passing Grade (unless it is a course
replacement, details Section 8.3).
Qualifying degreeMinimum
credits through
coursework †Minimum
credits through
research †Minimum
credits for
graduationMinimum
duration to
graduate ⋆Maximum
duration to
graduate ⋆
Group A
B.Tech., B.E. or
equivalent 4-year
bachelor’s degree24 54 78 3.5 years 7 years
Group B
M.Sc., M.A. or
equivalent18 54 72 3 years 6 years
Group C
M.Tech., M.E., or
M.Phil. or equiva-
lent9 54 63 2.5 years 6 years
Table 3.1: Minimum credit requirements and expected duration for a student enrolled in the
Ph.D. program from various qualifying degree. ⋆from the date of joining. †A student is
allowed to complete extra credit courses, if necessary, as recommended by the student’s DA
(s), DC, or AU.3.1. Credit requirements through course-work 6
3.1 Credit requirements through course-work
Students enrolled in a Ph.D. program must acquire the prescribed minimum credits through
coursework (see Table 3.1), which shall be completed:
•within one semester from the date of joining by students under Group C (Table 3.1)
•within the ﬁrst two semesters from the date of joining by students under Group A
and B (Table 3.1)
However, the duration could be extended with permission from SPGC.
3.1.1 Course registration
•Ph.D. students, after payment of prescribed semester fees, should complete their
registration in consultation with and approval of the FA/DA(s).
•Ph.D. students, in consultation with their FA/DA(s), can carry out course adjustments
within the time limit provided in the Academic Calendar.
•The Academic Office shall inform the student’sFA/DA(s)of any discrepancy in the
student’s registration. However, students should ensure on their own that they comply
with the credit requirements listed under the rules prescribed above.
•Ph.D.students who are unable to commence their course program during the semester in
which they have been admitted(due to unavoidable circumstances)maybe permitted to
commence their coursework in the following semester. This is a ONE-time possibility
and must be approved by the SPGC and the Chair, Senate.
3.1.2 Dropping a course
A Ph.D. student may drop courses for which the student may have registered, if the academic
load for the given semester is found to be too heavy, in consultation with the student’s
FA/DA(s), subject to the following
•Students must fulﬁll the minimum course credit requirements per semester and ensure
that the credits requirements laid down in Table 3.1 are not violated.
•The last date for course drop will be in the Academic Calendar
•Dropped courses will appear in the student’s transcript with the respective letter grade
(i.e. W). Withdrawn grade W will not count towards CPI.3.1. Credit requirements through course-work 7
3.1.3 Relaxation from course credit requirements
Normally, all students enrolling for Ph.D. programs have to undergo coursework in order to
complete the credit requirements as mentioned in Table 1. However, relaxation in the course
credit requirements may be provided on a case to case basis, subject to the recommendation
of SPGC and the discretion of the Senate.
3.1.4 Crediting NPTEL or MOOC courses
Ph.D. students are permitted to credit courses from NPTEL or MOOC under special
circumstances after the approval from FA/DA(s) and AU.
•Only PG level courses will be considered for course credit requirements.
•The number of credits acquired through the MOOC courses should not exceed 40%
(Individual AUs can lower this limit if needed )of the total course credit requirements
as speciﬁed in Table 3.1 /one.sup.
•Students must obtain prior approval from their FA/DA(s)and the MOOC or NPTEL
cell to register such courses with proper reasoning.
•Students must follow the institute NPTEL cell (and academic oﬃce) deadlines and
guidelines for course registration, adjustments, drop, completion, and course credits.
•For credit calculation and grading of NPTEL/MOOC course, see Annexure IV.
3.1.5 Research communication, ethics, and methods
•This course is a compulsory course for all Ph.D. students.
•This course carries 3 credits. It is graded as Pass/Non-Pass. No grade points are
allocated for the calculation of the CPI.This course is not counted for the minimum
course credit requirements mentioned in Table 3.1.
•Students are required to complete this course prior to the conﬁrmation of Ph.D.
registration (Section 5)
•Exemption for doing this course may be given to those students who have completed
such equivalent course(s) at the graduate level
–from an IIT, IISER, other reputed institutes/universities in India or abroad, and
–must have completed such course(s) within ﬁve years before joining the institute
1This limit is applicable for students enrolled in AY 2019 onwards3.2. Credits requirements through research 8
3.2 Credits requirements through research
Ph.D.students are required to acquire certain minimum credits through research for graduation
(see Table 3.1) via research courses.
•Doctoral Research : A student is allowed to register for doctoral research credits only
after meeting the requirements of Ph.D. registration. One doctoral research unit is
equal to 12 credits /two.sup, subdivided into 4 sub-units of 3 credits each. The grading will be
done by the DA(orco-advisor,if the doctoral advisor is not available due to any reason)
by the beginning of the next regular semester as deﬁned by the institute. However, the
grades of the semesters preceding the APS should be submitted before the APS.The
grades of the two semesters preceding APS will be considered ﬁnal only after the APS
(i.e. it is a provisional grade). If there is no communication received by the academic
section regarding the grades after the APS, they will be considered ﬁnal.
•The grading for research credits shall be diﬀerent from those of regular 10 point
grading scheme of IIT Goa. These grades shall not be counted towards the calculation
of CPI/SPI (Table III.4).
•For every 3 credits,a grade of S(satisfactory)or U(unsatisfactory)may be given. 3
credits may be equivalent to,but not limited to,8-10 hours of work per week. Although,
U grade may be counted towards the credit hours, but will not be considered for
evaluating the research credits earned during the Ph.D.program. Only S grades will
be counted towards the required research credits.
•The 12 doctoral research credits shall be graded in four sub-units as SSSS, SSSU,
SSUU,SUUU,UUUU.When a student registers with lower credits,the appropriate
grading may be done. For example,if a student registers of 6 credits,the grades may be
SS, SU or UU. Similarly, if a student registers for 3 credits, the grade shall be S or U.
•During doctoral research a student must secure a minimum of four S in any two
consecutive semesters. If a student fails to secure minimum research credits in any two
consecutive semesters, the case should be referred to SPGC through DC.
•For completion of the Ph.D. program, a student is required to secure a minimum of
54credits(i.e. 18S)through research. However,this is not an upper cap and merely
securing 18 S will not make a student entitled to submit a dissertation. The dissertation
submission shall be subject to the conditions mentioned in Chapter 7.
2Overloading of research credits may be considered under the recommendations of DPGC/SPGC on a
case-by-case basis.3.2. Credits requirements through research 9
•The credits earned through research /three.sup will be a guiding principle for academic
termination/probation/exit degree. Such decisions shall be on the discretion of the Senate,
subject to the recommendations of DC and SPGC.
•The grades allotted in the two semesters preceding APS should be presented to the DC.
If the grades awarded are not commensurate with the performance in the APS,then
the grades maybe revised accordingly as per the recommendations of the DC,which
should be reported to the SPGC for further action.
Graduate Research A Ph.D. student is also permitted to register for graduate research
credits until the student meets the requirements of Ph.D.registration. The student’s DA(s)
or an IIT Goa faculty may guide such as a course. The student may register for 3, 6, 9, or
12 credits in a given semester for this course. The evaluation for this course is same as the
Doctoral Research course. A maximum of 6 credits may be considered towards the minimum
research credit requirements for the Ph.D. program.
3 Students are allowed to take theory courses approved by DA(s)after the Ph.D.registration,which will be
counted as S,if the students acquires them in imum required grade(Section8.1)in such courses(considering
credit hour mapping). This is solely for satisfying them in imum requirements for an academic year and/or the
Ph.D. program.4
Doctoral committee
Doctoral Adviser (DA) For students under
•Group B and Group C (Table 3.1), the process of DA allocation should be completed
within the ﬁrst three months of their joining the institute,
•Group A (Table 3.1), the process of DA allocation should be completed within one
year of their joining the institute,
as per the policies laid down by the AU.
Doctoral Committee (DC) The DA(s) in consultation with the student, shall form the
DoctoralCommittee(DC)well be for e the comprehensive examination of the student(Section
5.1). The committee (typically consists of five members) shall comprise the following
•The doctoral advisor(s)
•Two-three faculty members from the students’ AU
•One faculty member(outside the student’s AU)from the institute who is conversant
with the subject
•Additional members if needed
This committee shall be chaired by any other member other than the DA. The DA is the
convener of this committee. DCs will be approved by the respective AU’s Postgraduate
Committee (once it is in place) and forwarded to the Dean (Academic Programs)’s oﬃce.
The doctoral committee has to be approved by SPGC. DC’s roles include but not limited to
•Checks whether a Ph.D.student is in good standing in terms of coursework and research
throughout the program
•Sets additional research and publication requirements (additional to what is speciﬁed
here in this Ph.D. manual)
10Doctoral committee 11
Change of DA (s) If a situation arises where a student requests for changing the DA or a
faculty makes a request to relieve the student and another faculty of the institute agrees to
supervise the student, then the student may be transferred with the approval of the Chair,
Senate.
•Under these circumstances the DC may be reformed.
•If the area of research requires modiﬁcation due to this change, the student’s entire
course work requirement shall be examined by the DC. The conﬁrmation of the Ph.D.
registration may be revised, if found necessary.
•In case no faculty member is willing to take the student,then the student will have to
exit (Section 8.5) or leave the Ph.D. program.5
Conﬁrmation of Ph.D. registration
The conﬁrmation of Ph.D. registration will be given to a student only after the successful
completion of the comprehensive examination (Section 5.1) and minimum course credit
requirements (e.g. see Section 5.1, Table 3.1) .
5.1 Ph.D. comprehensive examination
Ph.D. Comprehensive Examination is mandatory for every student to complete the Ph.D.
registration. This exam typically evaluates a student’s preparedness to conduct doctoral
research. The should be successfully completed within six months after the completion of
minimum course credit and CPI requirements.
DC of the student will manage the exam. The mode of Comprehensive Examination
(oral,written,or both)as well as the modusoperandi is decided by the student’s AU and is
intimated to the students. Students will be informed at least one month prior to the date of
examination.
A student failing in the exam in the ﬁrst attempt may be given additional chances.
However, students must successfully complete the exam within the stipulated time frame. If
a student fails to do so,the student will be exited/terminated from the Ph.D.program. DC
will submit the report of the examination(s) to the Academic Oﬃce within two weeks of
conducting the examination(s).
5.2 State of the Art Seminar (SOAS)
SOAS may bean additional requirement for the Ph.D.program set by the respective AU.If
the AU decides to make SOAS mandatory, it should be completed within six months of the
successful completion of the ComprehensiveExamination. SOAS will be conducted under
the guidance of DC.If the first SOAS is not satisfactory,the student is required to present
another SOAS within a month (or as prescribed by the DC).
126
Annual progress seminar
Every student enrolled for the Ph.D.program,including part-time Ph.D.students,must appear
forAnnualProgressSeminar(APS),after completing the Comprehensive Examination. APS
is open to all in the student’s school or program. Typically, a student gets a minimum of six
months after completing the comprehensive examination to present APS.
•The students enrolled in July will present their APS every July and students enrolled in
January semester will present their APS in January.
•The rules described here are also applicable to students who are supported by external
funding agencies. The APS date of such students may be ﬁxed by considering
requirements of the funding agencies.
•APS may also be required for enhancement (and/or continuation) of any assistantship
from the institute.
•Incase,if the student is not able to present APS according to the schedule,an application
for extension must be made at least 15 days before the due date of presentation to the
academic oﬃce. Such requests will be considered case to case basis.
The SOAS may replace the first APS ,if SOAS is made as an additional requirement by
an AU.The student shall be evaluated for the quality and quantity of the research. In addition
to the seminar,the student shall also submit a report to the DC at least ten days prior to the
APS. The APS will be reviewed by the doctoral committee. The DC shall submit a report to
the head/coordinator of the AU. The APS report will then be forwarded to the Academic
Oﬃce within a week from the APS date.
If the(coursework and/or research;seeChapter3orSection3.2,for details)performance
is found to be unsatisfactory, the student may be asked to present another seminar within
six months. If two consecutive APS are unsatisfactory,the student may be terminated with
or without a lower degree (details in Section 8.5). The decision in such incidents will be
decided on a case to case basis.
An additional member from other institutes may be invited for evaluation if mandated by
the funding agency.
137
Submission and evaluation of synopsis and dissertation
7.1 Pre-dissertation seminar
A Ph.D. candidate is required to present his/her research work before the submission of
synopsis. This seminar is open to all IIT Goa. The procedure is the following.
•The student must submit a report to the student’s DC at least seven days before the day
of the pre-dissertation seminar.
•A positive report from the DC will make the candidate eligible to submit the synopsis
to the DPGC/SPGC.The synopsis—an extended summary of the dissertation /one.sup—should
be submitted within three months of the pre-dissertation seminar to the DPGC/SPGC.
After the DPGC/SPGC has approved the synopsis,the candidate will have to submit
the dissertation, within a month of receipt of the DPGC/SPGC report.
•After the approval of the synopsis,the student’s DA(s)in consultation with DC will
submit a conﬁdential list of eight potential external examiners
–Guidelines to prepare the list of examiners are set by the institute in consultation
with SPGC. For example, examiners should be at the level of Assistant Professor
(or equivalent) or above, half of the examiners should be international examiners,
etc.
–The list of examiners should be recommended by the AU/DPGC and SPGC, and
ﬁnally approved by the Chair, Senate. The Chair, Senate may also decide the
order in which the examiners are contacted by the Academic Oﬃce.
•On unsatisfactory performance in the pre-dissertation seminar, a candidate may be
asked to give another seminar within six months of the ﬁrst seminar.
•If the synopsis and dissertation are not submitted within the stipulated period mentioned
above, the Ph.D. student will be asked to present the pre-dissertation seminar again.
1This will be sent to potential external referees along with the request to review a dissertation.
147.2. Submission of synopsis and dissertation 15
7.2 Submission of synopsis and dissertation
The dissertation and synopsis in the prescribed format are to be submitted to the Academic
Office along with the following certificates for submission.
•Approval from the DC and DPGC for submission of the dissertation.
•Certiﬁcate from the Ph.D. student and DA (s) conﬁrming that
–there is a prima facie case for consideration of the dissertation
–the dissertation does not contain any work which has been previously submitted
for the award of any degree except to the extent of collaboration,if any,which
may then be specified.
•Certiﬁcate of authorization from the DA (s) for submission of the dissertation.
•Undertaking/Report of the plagiarism check
•The Academic Oﬃce will check the prescribed course credits are completed (Chapter
3) by the student.
7.3 Evaluation of dissertation
•Two examiners will evaluate the dissertation.
•The Academic Office may communicate to external examiners,from the list of approved
examiners suggested by DC, for evaluation of dissertation within one week of the
approval of the synopsis. The synopsis will be sent to the examiners.
•There is a need to maintain the conﬁdentiality of proprietary information /two.sup.
•Examiners should inform (the Academic Oﬃce) the acceptance to evaluate the
dissertation within ﬁfteen days of communication.
–If no reply is received, a reminder may be sent on the sixteenth day.
–If no reply is received within one week, then the Academic Oﬃce will approach
other examiners.
•In the event all the examiners suggested by DC refuse to review the dissertation (or
insufficient number of evaluators as mentioned above),then the DC may suggest a new
list of examiners in consultation with DPGC/SPGC. It has to be then approved by the
Chair, Senate.
2It will be clearly mentioned in the cover letter.7.3. Evaluation of dissertation 16
•Names of the referees/examiners will be disclosed to the DA after the reports are
received. The referees’ names will be anonymous to the student until the reports are
received.
•On positive reports by the two referees(see the next subsection for details),thePh.D.
defence may be held.
1.If all the referees recommend acceptance of the dissertation as it is, or with
clariﬁcations of minor points the defence can be held.
2.If any of the referees recommend minor modiﬁcations in the dissertation, the
defence can be held only after the internal examiner certiﬁes that the changes
have been carried out.
3.If at least one of the referees recommend major revisions in the dissertation, the
revised dissertation should be resubmitted within six months after incorporating
the revisions to the satisfaction of the DC. The revised dissertation must be sent
for further reviews to all examiners who have examined the dissertation (and
follow Steps 1–5).
4.If any referee recommend rejection of the dissertation, an opinion of the third
examiner may be sought,and defence may be held upon positive recommendation
of the third examiner.
5.If all the referees recommend rejection of the dissertation, the dissertation in its
current form is rejected. Under such circumstances, the candidate is required to
carry out necessary changes and do additional work,if needed. The candidate
shall be allowed to submit the dissertation only after one year of receipt of the
reports. This period shall not exceed two years from the date of intimation by the
academic section. The routine process of dissertation evaluation may be carried
out as for dissertation submission.
Referees’ evaluation reports on Ph.D. dissertation
The examiners should send the reports addressed to the Dean(AcademicPrograms). After
receiving the report from an examiner,DPGC/SPGC will classify the examiner’s report in
one of the following categories. /three.sup
Category A If the corrections reported by an examiner are related to the language,such
as, grammar, spelling, punctuation, typographical errors, etc., the DA (s) or the internal
examiner can use their discretion regarding incorporation of such suggestions.
3This classiﬁcation can also be speciﬁed in the forms that we send to the referees so that the examiners can
give their views.7.4. Dissertation defence 17
Category B If an examiner points out minor technical mistakes, raises some queries or
suggests modifications but does not imply that the acceptance of the dissertation is subject
to removal of these defects to the examiner’s satisfaction,theDA(s)will communicate the
student’s response to the above to the DPGC/SPGC, and the same will be incorporated in the
dissertation to the satisfaction of the defence committee. In case the examiner (s) have asked
for the corrections incorporated in the dissertation based on their suggestions, the examiner
(s) concerned should be informed of the changes made.
Category C If an examiner
(i) outrightly rejects the dissertation or
(ii) raises technical points or suggests modiﬁcations
which must be answered/carried out to the examiner’s satisfaction before the dissertation
is accepted, the DC (s) will communicate to the DPGC/SPGC the changes made in the
dissertation, if any, in response to the examiner’s comments along with an explanatory note
which will be sent to the examiner /four.supwith a request to respond within six weeks . If the
examiner’s response is not received within this period, reminders will be sent and if no reply
is received within additional two weeks time, other referees will be contacted from the list of
examiners, if needed.
7.4 Dissertation defence
Constitution of the defence committee The committee shall comprise
•the Chair, who is a faculty member from a diﬀerent AU and not part of the DC of the
candidate, appointed by the Chair, Senate.
•an internal examiner (may be a member of DC other than DA (s))
•one external examiner (usually the one who has evaluated the dissertation)
•the student’s DA (s)
The defence committee shall be constituted by the Chair,Senate on recommendation from
the SPGC.
4 Only if the examiner wish to see the changes. Referee in CategoryC(i)may opt not to review the dissertation
again. The forms to be send to collect referee feedback will clearly specify these implementation aspects.7.4. Dissertation defence 18
Ph.D.defence The defence committee shall decide upon a suitable date and time for the
defence, which should be announced suitably at least one week before. Students will defend
their work at an open(it’s open to the institute faculty and students) viva voce examination
conducted by the defence committee. The defence may be held in online mode as well, if in
person meeting is not possible.
The defence committee will submit its report on the viva voce examination in the
prescribed format to the SPGC.Incase of unsatisfactory performance of the student in the
defence, the defence should be held again with the approval from the Chair, Senate.
Defence report The student will submit the ﬁnal dissertation copy in electronic format,
after duly incorporating the suggestions/corrections from the defence committee and external
examiners, to the student’s DC (s), within one month from the date of defence. This ﬁle
should include the signed copy of the approval sheet.8
Performance requirements and remedial tools
Students are expected to produce high-quality research and exhibit superior academic
performance. This section only provides minimum performance requirements and remedial
tools to improve performance.
8.1 Minimum CPI requirements
Students must maintain the minimum Cumulative Performance Index (CPI, see Annexure I)
of6.5 out of 10 at the end of every semester. Individual AUs can set a high value for the
minimum CPI requirements. If they do not maintain the minimum CPI requirements,they
will be in Academic Probation, and the remedial measures are discussed in Section 8.4.
Grade points less than ﬁve in any course For the evaluation of CPI, a student has to
secure a minimum grade point of 5. Students getting less than the minimum grade point 5
must repeat/replace the course with another, subject to meeting other requirements of the
Ph.D. program.
8.2 Failure on courses
•A student is not allowed to have more than ONE Failure grade(i.e. For FF,SeeTables
III.3 and III.4) in the student’s entire Ph.D. program. However a student has to secure
the minimum credit requirements for a semester (Section 8.1).
•If a student fails more than one course, the student is liable to Exit from the Ph.D.
program (Section 8.5).
•If a student fails in only ONE course, the student can
–avail of a re-examination in that course at the semester end (If the instructor
agrees) or
–register an alternative course as per the guidelines set by the SPGC
198.3. Grade improvement 20
–If the student continues,the student will be in academic probation in the following
semester unless the student secures the minimum credit and CPI requirements
for a semester (Section 8.1).
8.3 Grade improvement
A student who fails to maintain the minimum CPI requirements will be allowed to repeat the
course or replace a course for grade improvement,subject to meeting other credit requirements
of the Ph.D. program (Section 3.1).
•The course may be repeated if the student fails to get the minimum allowed grade for a
graduate course.
•The student must re-register the course that the student wishes to repeat in a subsequent
semester if the course is oﬀered or an alternative course available.
•The student’s FA/DC must approve this grade improvement plan before registering the
replacements courses. The student cannot replace a course with another course that is
already completed with the minimum allowed grade for a graduate course (e.g. ‘C’
grade) or above.
•The grade obtained in the re-registered course will supersede the earlier grade for
CPI calculation and the same will be reﬂected in the semester grade card; The ﬁnal
transcript contains all courses taken by the student.
•A student can avail of this option only for TWO(2)courses in the enrolled program
and only ONCE for a speciﬁc course.
•Students must complete grade improvements within the stipulated time for the completion of the minimum credit requirements of the Ph.D. program (Section 3.1).
8.4 Academic probation
A student will be put on academic probation for a maximum of one semester if the student
fails to meet the minimum CPI requirements
•The student will be granted academic probation with immediate eﬀect if the CPI
requirements are not met in the given semester.
•Academic probation will be reported to the Senate, through SPGC.
•At the end of the semester in which the academic probation is granted, the student
must obtain a CPI greater than or equal to the minimum CPI requirements8.5. Termination/Exit from the Ph.D. program 21
•After one semester of academic probation,if the student fails to achieve the satisfactory
performance the student is liable to Exit from the Ph.D. program (Section 8.5)
•Any concession or fee waiver is not applicable to Ph.D. students during the period of
Academic Probation
•Institute may relax TA duties of such students to enable them concentrate on their
academic activities.
•Students are not allowed to represent the Institute in extra curricular activities or contest
in student body elections during the period of probation.
8.5 Termination/Exit from the Ph.D. program
Termination A student may be terminated from the Ph.D. program without any degree, if
•the student concurrently registers for any academic program. This is with immediate
effect.
•the student takes an employment at another organization without converting the Full-
time Ph.D. program to an appropriate Part-time Ph.D. program (Section 2). This is
with immediate eﬀect. However, the student may be permitted to seek employment
after completing the pre-dissertation seminar with approval from SPGC.
•the student’s academic or research performance is poor, as described in any of the
performance measurements above or as identiﬁed by the concerned DC or SPGC.
•the student fails to successfully complete the comprehensive examination or qualifying
examination (Section 5.1)
•violation of the code of conduct of the institute
ExitRules and regulations for the exit from the Ph.D. program as follows. Note that
exit differs from termination in the sense that the former may facilitate in getting a lower
degree/diploma (See Table 8.1).
•The exit with a lower degree/diploma shall not be the right of the student. However,
if the concerned DC and/or DPGC recognizes suﬃcient work done deserving such
consideration,and recommends exit with a degree,SPGC may consider it and requests
for the Chair, Senate’s approval
•If the Chair, Senate approves awarding a lower (Exit) degree (Table 8.1) per se
means that the student would be eligible for such a lower exit degree with immediate
effect. The student will automatically be registered to the lower degree on approval of8.5. Termination/Exit from the Ph.D. program 22
SPGC without any applications from the student. However,the continuation of such
registration shall be subject to payment of fees and other necessary conditions.
•The student may be given up to six months to complete the requirements for the award
of a lower degree.
•Failure to comply with all requirements for the exit degree within six (6)months of
conversion may lead to termination from the exit degree.
•Any ﬁnancial implications due to exit from the PhD program will be decided by
respective funding agencies.
•Eligibility requirements for diﬀerent exit degree/diploma. Satisfying the requirements
alone do not guarantee any such degree.
– Master of Science (M. S.) by research : On successful completion of course
credit requirements (e.g. a minimum of two semesters of course work) and
research work requirements (more than the M. Tech. thesis requirements). This
option is typically considered when the student is a conﬁrmed Ph.D. student and
well advanced in the program.
– Master of Science(M.S.)by coursework : On successful completion of course
credit requirements(equivalent to or more as specified in the M.Tech. manual;
for example, the student may require at least three semesters of course work)
and/or research work requirements.
– Postgraduate Diploma (PgD): On successful completion of course credit requirements for at least two semesters .
S/N Ph.D. discipline Exit degree/diploma⋆
1 Computer Science and Engineering
M.S. degree or
Postgraduate
Diploma2 Electrical Engineering
3 Mechanical Engineering
4 Mathematics
5 Chemistry
6 Economics, Language and Literature
7 Physics
Table8.1: Possible exit degree/diploma options. ⋆See the text for the respective eligibility
requirements.9
Leave rules
Students may be granted leave upon recommendation from the FA/DA and application
through the concerned AU. Applications must be submitted well in advance of the date
of commencement of the leave requested. Dean (Academic Programs) is the competent
approving authority for all the leaves mentioned below.
Students enrolled under CSIR, UGC, and other categories are governed by the rules
of the bodies which provide ﬁnancial support. Leave rules of the parent organization are
applicable for Part-time students.
9.1 Personal Leave and Casual Leave
Students funded by the Ministry of Education or Institute are entitled for leave for a maximum
of 30 days per calendar year in addition to the Public Holidays. The leave will be treated as
part of the student’s tenure. The leaves due can be carried over to the next year, however
not more than 90 days can be accumulated at anytime during the entire tenure. During the
first year of fellowship or for any uncompleted year,leave may be accounted on a pro-rata
basis for the completed months. Leave account of the students enrolled shall be credited with
leave in advance in two instalments on the ﬁrst day of January and July for every completed
calendar year considering that the maximum number of leaves available is not more than 90
days at any point of time.
9.2 Maternity and Paternity leave
Maternity and paternity leave would be available to female and male students as per
Government of India instructions issued from time to time /one.sup.
1Details are available in IIT Goa Statutes
239.3. Medical Leave 24
9.3 Medical Leave
Leave on medical grounds,duly supported by a medical certiﬁcate(from the IITGoa medical
section), may be granted to a student for up to 10 days per calendar year. Such leaves not
availed will not be carried over to the next year.
9.4 Academic Leave
Academic leave would be available to students to attend seminars,conferences,workshops
in India or abroad to present research work. The duration of academic leave includes the
transit time,which is calculated on the basis of travel time from the institute to the place of
the event. The academic leave may be given up to six weeks .
9.5 Absence without sanctioned leave
Student’s absence without sanctioned leave
•will entail loss of the student’s financial assistantship for the period of absence, and
•may result in the termination of the student’s program on the recommendation of the
concerned AU and approval of SPGC.10
Miscellaneous
10.1 Change of status from Full-time to Part-time
A Full-time Ph.D. student is not allowed to take any positions unless assigned/approved by
the institute. However, a Full-Time Ph.D. student may be allowed to convert to Part-Time
Ph.D. with the approval of the Senate.
10.2 Guidelines for research work involving human
participation
Ph.D. students whose research work involves human participation(either directly or indirectly),
should obtain the Institute Ethics Committee (IEC) approval prior to the start of the study or
the component of the study involving human participation. IEC approval is mandatory for all
such projects. In fact, this is mandated by several funding agencies such as DST,DBT,CSIR,
and ICMR.IEC approval is also a prerequisite for publishing any such research work. IEC
approval cannot be taken retrospectively.
25I
Requirements for students enrolled before AY 2020-2021
The Ph.D. manual is applicable in spirit to all students enrolled for the Ph.D. program at IIT
Goa. Meanwhile the rules are applicable to all the students enrolled for the Ph.D. program,
certain amendments to the rules and regulations are recommended for the students enrolled
for Ph.D. program during the academic year 2018-2019 and 2019-2020. The deviation from
rules for such students are detailed below.
Credit requirements from coursework (Section 3.1) The students enrolled in the academic year 2018-2019 and 2019-2020 shall have to meet the credit requirements as tabulated
in Table I.1.
Qualifying degreeMinimum
credits through
coursework †Minimum
duration to
graduate ⋆Maximum
duration to
graduate ⋆
Group A
B.Tech., B.E. or equivalent 4-year bachelor’s
degree 44-56 3.5 years 7 years
Group B
M.Sc., M.A. or equivalent 5-year Mas-
ter’s degree32-46 3 years 6 years
Group C
M.Tech., M.E., or M.Phil. or equivalent
6-year Master’s degree 16-22 2.5 years 6 years
Table I.1: Minimum credit requirements and expected duration for a student enrolled (before
AY 2020-2021) in the Ph.D. program from various qualifying degree. ⋆from the date of
joining. †A student is allowed to complete extra credit courses,if necessary,as recommended
by the student’s DA (s), DC, or AU
Crediting NPTEL or MOOC courses (Section 3.1.4) The grading system proposed in
the manual shall be applicable for all courses the students shall enroll for after this manual
comes into effect. The courses that have already been graded shall remain unchanged.
26Requirements for students enrolled before AY 2020-2021 27
Credit requirement through research (Section 3.2) There shall be no minimum credit
requirement through research for students enrolled in the academic years 2018-2019 and
2019-2020. From the academic year 2020-2021 all students irrespective of the year of
enrollment shall register for 12 credits every semester and they shall be graded as detailed in
Section 3.2. The waiver is only on the minimum research credits to be earned (i.e. 54 credits
or 18 S). All other rules of doctoral research shall be applicable.
Minimum CPI requirements(Section8.1) The students enrolled in academic years 2018-
2019and 2019-2020 shall have to secure a minimum CPI of 6.0 out of 10 in order to fulfil
the course work requirements for registration to the Ph.D. program.
Academic probation(Section8.4) The students enrolled in the academic years 2018-2019
shall be governed by the existent rules of probation during the years 2018-2020.
Formation of doctoral committee(Chapter4) For the students enrolled in the academic
years 2018-2019 and 2019-2020 the existing doctoral committee shall continue.
Ph.D. comprehensive examination(Section5.1) If the students enrolled in the academic
years 2018-2019 and 2019-2020 have had satisfactory performance during an APS or appeared
for any equivalent examination conducted by the respective academic unit or doctoral
committee,then that shall be considered as successful completion of Ph.D. comprehensive
examination. If the student enrolled in these years,has not appeared for any such scrutiny,
then they will have to appear for a Ph.D. comprehensive examination as per the existing rules
of the academic unit.
State of the Art Seminar (SOAS, Section 5.2) If the students enrolled in the academic
year 2018-2019 have had satisfactory performance during an APS or appeared for any
equivalent examination conducted by the respective academic unit or doctoral committee,
then the SOAS is waived off for such students. AUs may take appropriate decision for the
SOAS for students admitted in AY 2018-2019 and 2019-2020.
All other rules and regulations described in the manual shall be applicable to all Ph.D.
students of IIT Goa.
Graduate seminar course The students may be allowed to take two such courses in the
entire Ph.D. program.II
Academic performance index
The academic performance of a student in a semester is measured by Semester Performance
Index (SPI). SPI is the weighted average of the ﬁnal grade points obtained in all the courses
taken by the student during the semester. SPI is calculated to two decimal places.
An example SPI calculation is as follows. Suppose in a given semester; a student has
taken five courses having credits C1,C2,C3,C4,C5 and the student’s final grade points in
those courses are G1,G2,G3,G4,G5 respectively. Then, the student’s SPI is
SPI =C1G1+C2G2+C3G3+C4G4+C5G5
C1+C2+C3+C4+C5(II.1)
Cumulative Performance Index(CPI) CPI denotes the up-to-date academic performance
of a student from the time the student enrolled in the Institute. CPI is the weighted average
of the ﬁnal grade points obtained in all the courses taken by the student since the student
entered the Institute. The CPI calculation is the same as the SPI calculation.
28III
Course credit calculation, grading, and types
III.1 Credit calculation from contact hours
Courses are classiﬁed mainly into theory, laboratory, self-learning, seminar, or research
courses. Each course is associated with a ﬁxed number of credits commensurate with
the quantum of work associated with that course. For example, theory courses consist of
lecture(L)hours and tutorial(T)hours,and may have practical(P)hours in special cases.
Laboratory courses consist of practical (P) hours, and attached tutorial (T) hours in special
cases. Credit (C) hours for a course is computed as follows /one.sup
•For a full semester Lab/Practical only course, i.e., one with zero lecture hours but
possibly with tutorials, the credit is
T+/ceilingleftbiggP
2/ceilingrightbigg
•Otherwise, i.e., when the course involves lectures, the credit is
L+T+/floorleftbiggP
2/floorrightbigg
•Credit hours of a half-semester course is half of that of a full semester course with
similar L-T-P parameters.
Examples (also, see Table III.1 and Table III.2).
•A3-0-0 full semester course with 3 lecture hours per week and no practicals or tutorials
constitutes 3 credits. A half-semester course with similar parameters carries 1.5 credits.
•A standard 3-0-3 full semester course with 3 lecture hours per week and 3 lab hours
per week carries 4 credits. So does a standard 3-1-0 course with 3 lecture hours per
week and 1 tutorial hour per week.
•A practical course with parameters 0-0-3, i.e., 3 hours of practical hours per week,
carries2credits. Similarly a 0-1-2 course with 1 tutorial hour and 2 lab hours per week
carries 2 credits.
1Adapted from U.G. Curricular Structure 2019, IIT Goa
29III.2. Grading system 30
Course Lecture (L) Tutorial (T) Practical (P) Credits Remarks
XX801 4 0 0 4
XX856 4 0 2 5
XX541 2 1 0 3
XX542 0 0 4 2
XX543 0 1 2 2
XX545 3 0 3 4 Floor
XX611 0 0 3 2 Ceiling
Table III.1: Hours per week for 12-14 week course
Course Lecture (L) Tutorial (T) Practical (P) Credits Remarks
XX801 4 0 0 2
XX856 4 0 2 3 Floor
XX541 2 1 0 2 Ceiling
XX542 0 0 4 1
XX543 0 1 2 2 Ceiling
XX545 3 0 3 2 Floor
XX611 0 0 3 1 Floor
Table III.2: Hours per week for 6-8 week course
Old system Credit ( C) hours for a course is computed based on the following formula /two.sup
C= 2(L+T) +P
Examples.
•A theory course with two lectures (L= 2),one tutorial (T= 1),two practical (P= 2)
hours per week throughout the semester has a credit of C= 8.
•Similarly,a lab course with two tutorials (T= 2)and two laboratory (P= 2)hours
per week throughout the semester carries a credit of C=6.
III.2 Grading system
For some courses(typically core courses and electives)the passing grades that can be assigned
to students have an associated grade point. A grade point is an integer number from 0 to 10
reﬂecting the level of performance of the student in the course. Letter grades associated with
a grade point and their descriptions are listed in TableIII.3. SeeTableIII.4 for grades that
are associated with no grade points.
2Adapted from IIT Bombay. This scheme is included for completeness.III.3. Graduate seminar 31
Letter Grade Grade Point Remarks Description
A* 10 Exceptional Exceptional performance and mastery of the
subject. The A* grade can only be given for
core courses. This grade indicates an exceptional mastery over the subject when compared
with students across multiple batches.
A+ 10 Outstanding Outstanding mastery of the subject and applications.
A 9 Excellent Excellent mastery of the subject and applications.
B+ 8 Very good Very good mastery and scholarship in the subject.
B 7 Good Good mastery and scholarship in the subject.
C+ 6 Average Acceptable understanding and mastery of the subject.
C 5 Below average Below-average understanding and proficiency
in the subject. Grade C is the minimum grade
required for the evaluation of the final CPI of
graduate students (masters and Ph.D.). If a
graduate student secures a grade less than C,
the student shall replace/repeat the course in
the subsequent semester in accordance with
other rules to be adhered to by the student.
D 4 Marginal Border-line understanding of the subject and
marginal performance.
E 2 Exposed Grade E is a failing grade. Grade E is awarded
for the students who attended the lectures and
learned the subject to some extent but could
not demonstrate marginal performance. Grade
E is an acceptable prerequisite for registering
in another course, however, students must re-
register and pass.
F 0 Poor The F grade indicates extremely poor and unsatisfactory performance in a course.
Table III.3: Letter grades with grade points
III.3 Graduate seminar
•Each graduate seminar consists of 2 credits.
•A student shall not take more than ONE graduate seminar course in the entire Ph.D.
program.III.4. Self-learning/reading courses 32
III.4 Self-learning/reading courses
•Any course approved by the Senate as elective courses/ core courses which are being
oﬀered for graduate students may be oﬀered as a self-learning course/ reading course
and will be treated as per the course document.
•The courses meant to be oﬀered as self-learning courses must be approved by the
Senate.III.4. Self-learning/reading courses 33
Letter Grade Remarks Description
P Pass This grade is solely for Pass/Fail courses and represents satisfactory performance. No grade points allocated,but credits acquired.
F Poor The F grade indicates extremely poor and unsatisfactory performance in a Pass/Fail course.
S Satisfactory Progress satisfactorily in a dissertation, research, or project-
oriented course. No grade points allocated.
U Unsatisfactory Progress unsatisfactorily in a dissertation, research, or project-
oriented course. No grade points allocated.
I Incomplete Grade I is awarded in a lecture/lab course if a student has
satisfactory performance, but has
•not appeared for the end-semester examination on medical
grounds, or
•performed poorly/did not appear in the end-semester
examination due to unavoidable circumstances.
The student has to appear in the end semester examination when
the course is oﬀered next or when the exam is offered next;
otherwise, this grade will be converted to grade F. Grade I will
then be converted into a performance grade depending on the
overall performance in the course.
W Withdrawn The course is withdrawn after the initial course adjustment
period and before the course drop deadline speciﬁed in the
academic calendar. This grade appears in a student’s transcript.
L Audit Students registered for a course as audit shall be awarded grade
L if they fulfill the requirement of duly satisfactory performance
as prescribed by the Instructor. If a student does not qualify
for the grade L, it will be assumed that the course has been
dropped by that student and will not appear in the transcript.
FXFailed due to
low
attendanceGrade FX in a course is awarded if a student does not maintain
the attendance requirement in the lectures/tutorials. This grade
may also be awarded to the students having bad or incomplete
in-semester records on non-medical reasons. FX grade is
typically declared in the first week of November for the Autumn
semester courses and in the ﬁrst week of April for Spring
semester courses(The academic office decides otherwise). A
student with FX grade in a given course is not permitted to take
the end semester examination in that course. Such a student
gets one more chance to register the same course to improve
grades. Grade FX does not count in SPI / CPI calculations.
However, it will be counted as a backlog. This is an internal
grade and never shown in the transcripts.
Table III.4: Letter grades with no grade pointsIV
Credit calculation and grading for NPTEL/MOOC courses
We follow a uniform credit calculation and grade assignment for NPTEL/MOOC courses /one.sup
(Table IV.1)
Contact hours per semester Number of credits
40-44 3
28-32 2
12-16 1
Table IV.1: NPTEL/MOOC credit calculation
For every additional 8 hours per course above the higher limit in each row, 1 credit may
be added. For example, see Table IV.2.
Actual work hours per semester
as mentioned in the certiﬁcate/
course brochureCredits to be allotted
24 (16 + 8) 2
20 (16 + 4) 1
Table IV.2: NPTEL/MOOC credit calculation for additional hours
Note: No ﬂooring or ceiling will be applied compared to regular courses oﬀered by IIT
Goa
Grade allotment to NPTEL/MOOC courses A student opting for NPTEL/ MOOC
courses will have to secure a minimum of 65% for fulfilling credit requirements and grade
allocation
The next higher grade may be allotted subject to the following conditions.
•The candidate may request for a written examination, which may be conducted by
the AU. Such requests should be recommended by the AU to the Dean (Academic
Programs) for consideration.
1This follows the new credit system, which can be easily extended based on Annexure III
34Credit calculation and grading for NPTEL/MOOC courses 35
Score (%) as printed on grade
card issued by respective authority Grades
65-70 D (4)
70-75 C (5)
75-80 C+ (6)
80-85 B (7)
85-90 B+ (8)
90-95 A (9)
95-100 A+ (10)
Table IV.3: Grade allotment to NPTEL/MOOC courses
•The examination will be conducted by respective AU on recommendation from SPGC
•The absolute score in the exam should be at least the score obtained by the student in
the exam conducted by NPTEL/MOOC etc.
•The highest grade that can be obtained will be one higher than the grade obtained by
the candidate as calculated from NPTEL/MOOC exam (see, e.g., Table IV.4).
Score obtained in
NPTEL/MOOCGrade allottedScore obtained in the
exam conducted New grade to
be allotted
64% F NA NA
73% C 73% C+
81% B 99% B+
Table IV.4: Improving allotted grade to NPTEL/MOOC coursesGlossary
APSAnnual Progress Seminar. 8, 9, 13, 27
AUThe Academic Unit such as a program, a department, a school, or a center where the
Ph.D. student is enrolled. 1, 3–5, 7, 10, 12–14, 19, 26, 27, 34
AYAcademic Year, e.g. AY 2020-2021. 7, 26
CPI Cumulative Performance Index. 6, 8, 12, 19, 20, 28
CSIRCouncil of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research. 23
DA The doctoral advisor or supervisor of a student enrolled in a Ph.D. program. Doctoral
Advisor and Supervisor are used interchangeably. 4–10, 15–17, 23, 26
DC The Doctoral Committee of a Ph.D. student. 1, 5, 8–10, 12–18, 20, 21, 26
DPGC The Department Postgraduate Committee. 14–17, 21
FA The Faculty Adviser of a student. 4–7, 20, 23
IIT Indian Institute of Technology. ii
SOAS State Of the Art Seminar. 12, 13, 27
SPGC The Senate Postgraduate Committee. i, iii, 1, 6–10, 14–22, 24, 35
SPI Semester Performance Index. 8, 28
TA Teaching Assistantship. 2, 21
UGC The University Grants Commission. 23
36