UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMMES
PROCEDURES and REQUIREMENTS


'Idea Vinayena Deepyate'
'Knowledge shines with humility'

INDIAN INSTITUTE of TECHNOLOGY GOA
of Manual





Index

Indian Institute of Technology, Goa





1. Academic Session

1.1 Dates
1.2 Duration
1.3 Academic Calendar

2. Curriculum or Programme of Study
2.1 Curriculum
2.2 Semesters: Autumn, Spring, and Summer
2.3 Course Credit System/Structure
2.4 Seminary
2.5 Projects

3. Registration
3.1 Semester-wise registration
3.1.1 Procedure for Registration
3.1.2 Registration for the first two smelters
3.1.3 Registration for third and subsequent smelters
3.2 Registration for the Summer Term
3.3 Course Adjustment (Adding and Dropping a Course)
3.4 National Service Scheme (NSS)/National Ports Organisation (NSO)
3.5 Opportunities for students to clear backlogs
3.5. Courses in the unscheduled smelter
3.6 Grant of Leave/Semester Drop on Medical Round

4. Examination or Assessment
4.1 Attendance.
4.2 Nodes of the Is segment
4.3 Trading
4.4 He-examination due to illness or accident
4.5.1 Semester Performance Index (SPI)
4.5.2 Cumulative Performance Index (CPI)
4.5.3 Semester Trade Report
4.5.4 Complications of Failing Grades on CPI 4.6 Nail and Incomplete Trades (Conversion Rule)
4.6.1 of' Trade.
4.6.2 ‘of' Trade
4.6.3 of and of grades.
4.6.4 Policies on disclosing the evacuated end-smelter answer books, period of
retention, and re-evaluation. 4.7 He-examination (50% weightage)
4.7.2 He-examination due to
4.8 Treatment of Malpractice or Unfair Means

5. Special features in registration
5.1 Carrying backlogs forward
5.2 Audit Course
5.3 Guided Study
5.4 Repeating a course
5.5 Course Substitution
5.6 If it is a core or compulsory course, there will be no substitution, and the same
course must be repeated.
5.6.1 In the case of an institute elective course, it may be substituted by another
Institute
5.6.2 If it is a departmental elective, it may be substituted by another departmental elective.
course from the same group.
5.7 Overloading of Courses:
5.8 Self-Study
5.9 Summer Courses
5.10 Change of Branch

6. Seminars and Projects
6.1 B.Tech. Project

7. Internship
8. Performance Requirements
8.1 ward of degree
8.2 Ward of Medals
8.3 Minimum Semester Performance
8.4 Low Track Option
8.5 Maximum Period for Completion of the Programme
8.6 Early termination

9. Miscellaneous
9.1 Helping weaker students
9.2 Faculty Adviser
9.3 Practical Training
9.4 Academic Calendar

10. Glossary

























Indian Institute of Technology, Goa

IIT Goa is offering an undergraduate programme for the year 2016. The broad objectives of the
programme are:
• To provide the highest level of education in the field of technology and science, and to
produce competent engineers and scientists with well-hoped managerial and
entrepreneurial skills,  team spirit, and leadership qualities that can contribute
towards the country and society
• To promote a spirit of free and objective inquiry and the development of knowledge in
different discipline.
• To ease student participation in action-building through technology development that
is sensitive to local needs.
Academic programmes are governed by rules and regulations approved by the Senate.
time to time. The Senate is a statutory and supreme body of the Institute that governs all
academic matters of the Institute, and the rulings of the Senate Chairman are final in regard to all
academic issues. The Senate continuously monitors the academic programme and makes
appropriate modifications or improvements as and when required. The Senate also sets a definite
time schedule for various academic activities. His manual sets out the procedures and
requirements of the undergraduate programme of study that fall under the purview of the Senate
Under the Graduate Committee Tree (SUGC), a standing committee of the Senate
His institute-level committee decides the pace and even the continuation of the student or
otherwise, on the basis of their overall performance and academic record.
IIT Goa is a very student-oriented place, and it is always an endeavour to ensure that the students
of this institute get the best of everything that is needed to create outstanding scientists and
engineers.
Thank you for choosing IIT Goa. I wish all students a very bright future and a successful career.




Late: June 2019 Mean of Academic Programme

Introduction
Committees and units of the institute that are directly concerned with the undergraduate
Programme are:
Programme Undergraduate Committee (P UGC): Each academic department constitutes this
committee, which consists of a confirmed nominee nominated by the department (in consultation with the
faculty of the department), the Faculty Coordinator of the Programme, who will be the Chairman of
PUGC and two student representatives. Student representatives are nominated by the
undergraduate students in the department for a one-year period. The tenure of faculty members
is for two years, with half of them retiring each year (or as decided by the department).
The PUGC:
• Advises the students about their curriculum and academic opportunities
• Monitor the progress of academically weak students.
• Candles any problem faced by students in their academic programme.

Senate Undergraduate Committee (SUGC): This is a standing committee formed by the Senate.
to look after all the issues regarding the institute of the program. It makes recommendations to the
Senate on all academic issues, including policy matters and specific problem instances related to
of students and of the program. Its constituents are the members of various PUGCs.
(Programme Under Graduate Conveners) where applicable, last SUGC chairperson (ex-officer),
one Senate nominee and four student representatives nominated by the student body. The
The chairperson is elected by the constituent members.
Outline of the Programme
The B.Tech programme consists of courses in sciences, humanities, and social sciences.
Engineering and technology, and other related topics. The sequence of studies broadly consists
of four stages.
The first stage is an introduction to the sciences, humanities, and technical arts (such as
workshops etc.). This is common for all of the programmes.
The second stage is the study of engineering courses that emphasise broad-based knowledge.
in interdisciplinary Mary areas, which enables the students to appreciate the links between science,
engineering, and humanities.
In the third stage, the students are exposed to subjects in the chosen areas of study, which dwell
on the principles governing the design and which develop in them the ability for physical and
analytical modelling, design, and development.
During the final stage, an engineering student studies problems of integrated design with an
awareness of size, performance, optimisation, and cost, and works independently only on a B.Tech.
Project. Students are thus initiated into the methods of research, library reference work, and the use of
engineering scientific equipment and instruments, learning modern computational techniques, and
writing of technical and scientific reports. In parallel with the last two stages, the student is
introduced to the social and economic objectives of the era and to the interaction between men,
machine, and nature. His is sought to be achieved through elective courses (to be offered in the
forthcoming scholars) in the humanities and social sciences, and through practical training,
fieldwork, work, visits, and seminary. In addition, students are also made aware of environmental
issues through an introductory course in environmental science and engineering.
The requirements for degree programmes run by the Institute are broadly classified  follows:
(a) Institute Requirements (further divided into CORE courses, elective courses, and other
requirements ). (b) Departmental Requirements (further divided into compulsory courses, elective
courses, and other requirements (projects, internships,  and seminars).

Academic Session

1.1 Semester

The Institute follows a specialised credit-based smelter system. The academic session normally
runs from the end of July in one year to the middle of July in the next year. It is divided into three
parts:
Semester I: From the fourth week of July to the last week of November
Semester: From the first week of January to the first week of May.
Summer Term (not a regular semester): From the middle of May to the middle of July.

Semester I begins in July and is known as the Autumn Semester, and the semester that begins in
January is known as the spring semester. During the summer vacation, there is one additional term.
for summer courses known as the Summer Semester (not a regular semester). The Institute runs
summer courses, self-study courses, etc. (subject to availability and consent of the faculty)
member(s)) to provide an opportunity to clear backing course(s), if any.

1.2 Duration

Each of the two regular smelters consists of about sixteen weeks, including one week of mid-
smelter recess. About nine working days of each smelter are used for the end smelter.
examination, and a one-week period during which some steps are utilised for the mid-smelter.
examination. The equivalent of fourteen weeks is devoted to teaching, which excludes all holidays.
and days spent on both examinations in each smelter. The summer term consists of eight
teaching weeks, not including holidays and examination days.

1.3 Academic Calendar

The dates of all academic activities, including those of registration, late registration, and the last date of
document submission, first and last days of classes, add-drop of courses, examinations,
make-up examination, deadline for final grade submission, and vacation are published in the
Academic Calendar every year by the office of the Mean (of). The academic calendar is also
available on the web page of the Institute.

2. Curriculum or Programme of Study
2.1 Curriculum
Every department has a prescribed course structure, which in general terms is known as
Curriculum or Course of Study It prescribes courses to be studied in each school. The courses
of study are updated every semester and are available on the Institute's website.
2.2 Course Credit System/Structure
To be copied from the minutes of the Curriculum Committee
3. Registration
3.1 Semester-wise registration
Registration is done at the beginning of each semester on the prescribed dates announced by
time to time, and is mandatory for every student until s/he completes their academic programme.
At the beginning of each academic year, each student is assigned to a faculty
Adviser (F.A.) The student can register for courses they intend to take during a given semester or summer term only on the basis of the programme for each discipline as given in the courses.
of study and as per the advice given by their faculty adviser. The faculty adviser is expected to
Discuss with the student their academic performance during the previous semester and decide
the number and nature of the courses for which the students can register during the semester
within the framework of the guidelines given by the SUGC. The faculty adviser is also authorised.
to ask the student to drop one or more courses based on their academic performance after
first smelter or year and the corresponding categorization. In fact, the faculty adviser may
Prepare a revised plan of study at a slower pace for students with poor performance.
3.1.1 Procedure for Registration
The institute has an office/online registration system, and registration is normally done on the
first two days of each semester and the summer term. The registration schedule was announced in
advance (Academic Calendar). Students should contact their respective faculty advisers for
consultation and registration; this involves the selection of courses consistent with the specific
credit requirements detailed in the courses of study and subject to the students’ performance in
the previous smelter. The academic registration process gets completed only after the PUGC.
The convened/faculty adviser approved the registration form. A registration is considered valid only if
There is no timetable conflict between the courses for which the student has registered.
and Backlogs)
Unless this procedure is completed, registration will be considered invalid. In any case,
Registration must be completed on or before the prescribed last date for registration. Students
having outstanding dues to the institute or osteo shall not be permitted to register. Late
Registration may be permitted only for valid reasons and on payment of a late registration fee as
prescribed from time to time. However, if a student fails to register during any semester, their
Registration is liable to be cancelled.
Students taking backing courses are required to register by filling out a Course Registration Form.
(CRF), which will be made available to them by the Academic Section. The CRF will contain all
the compulsory courses of the smelter pre-printed. The student should duly complete the CRF.
get it approved by the faculty adviser, and then submit the same to the Academic Section for
further necessary action. The faculty adviser may recommend a reduced load for students with
backlogs after considering the regulations as decided by the SUGC.
3.1.2 Registration for the first two smelters
In each of the first two semesters of the programme, a student is required to register for all the
courses listed in the curriculum for the smelter. In addition, students who are identified as
academically weak at the end of the first semester may be prescribed a specially worked-out
Road in consultation with the faculty adviser. These students are required to do manual
registration.
Registration of a student in a course may be cancelled at any stage by the Academic Section if
It is found that they do not meet the pre-requisites of the course, or if there is a clash in the
student's time table preventing her/him from attending the course, or if it is for and that s/he is not
eligible to register for that course for any other reason. The instructor of a course may also
recommend cancellation of registration for any student in that course for reasons such as absence.
from classes without proper authorization. The instructor may recommend de-registering such
students up to four weeks prior to the last day of classes. The instructor should send
registration recommendations to the SUGC Chairperson. The same information should also be
sent to the concerned PUGC. The SUGC Chairperson's decision in each case shall be conveyed.
to the instructor and the student at least two weeks prior to the last day of classes.
3.1.3 Registration for third and subsequent smelters
As has already been mentioned, students must regularly register for every school at its
commencement until the completion of their programme. From the third semester onwards, a student is normally required to register for a minimum of credits as recommended by PUGC in every semester.
after taking into account the grades of the re-examination, if any.
Each course carries a weight in terms of credits, indicating the approximate number of contacts.
hours (lectures and tutorials and/or laboratory hours) as well as self-study hours per week.
required for the course. The edit calculation for a course is done using the following formula:
C=Of+Of+P+A, where C is the number of credits, L is the number of lecture hours, and T is the
number of tutoring hours, P is the number of laboratory hours, and A is the additional number of
hours needed for assignments and projects, as decided at the time of approval of the course.
The normal academic load is up to 36 credits per semester. Students may register for up to 30
percent less or 30 percent more credits than the normal load.
For discussion and replacement
Exceptions to Regular Rules Regarding Academic Road
(a) Underload: Students who are identified as academically deficient (on academic probation)
may register for a minimum of 10 credits as advised by the faculty adviser or PUGC .
(b) Overload: In special cases, students can register for courses beyond the granulation.
requirement as advised by the faculty adviser/PUGC.
Withdrawal on medical grounds or other exceptional reasons may be permitted by SUGC up to a
maximum of two smelters during the students' go-ire programme. A student who does not register
For a regular semester (Autumn or Spring), without prior permission from SUGC, the student will
be registered with the programme, and they may not be normally readmitted.
3.2. Registration for the Summer Term
Students can register for a maximum of four courses during the summer programme for a payment of
registration fees at the prescribed rate. The course will run during the summer, provided a minimum
of 5 students register, and a faculty member is available to offer the services you use. The course
The instructor will monitor the attendance of the students registered, and he may award an “of” grade.
as per the rule for poor attendance. Normal trading may be followed for the summer courses.
3.3 Course Adjustment (Adding and Dropping of a Course)
Within the first two weeks of the commencement of a smelter, a student is permitted to make
adjustments in his academic load by the addition or deletion of one or more courses provided
Total credits normally prescribed in the curriculum are not affected (by reloading or underwood) by such
adjustments. In the third or any of the subsequent semesters, the students find their academic
load too heavy, they may drop one or two courses out of the registered ones, provided the
minimum credit requirement is fulfilled. It has to be done in consultation with the faculty.
adviser/PUGC convened within two weeks of the commencement of the semester.
The students, however, will not be permitted to drop the course(s) for which they have
registered. Courses dropped by a student may be taken during the summer term (if offered). or
during a subsequent smelter. When there is a need for course adjustment through addition,
If substitution or dropping of course(s) arises, the student should do it mentally by filling out a course.
Adjustment Form (CAF) Each add/drop request needs to be accepted by the concerned course.
instructor. This should be done in consultation with and with the approval of the faculty adviser or PUGC.
Convened. Each copy has to be signed by both the student and the faculty adviser. In all the
In most cases, course adjustments or dropping of courses must be done before the last date for course addition.
and drop, as announced by the Institute in its Academic Calendar. The student must submit the
CAF to the Academic Office within the prescribed time. In the eyes of the students, facing academic
problems, and in exceptional cases, SUGC may allow them to drop courses (subject to
maintain the minimum course credit requirements even after the last date for dropping
the courses if a special recommendation is made by the faculty adviser and the PUGC to the
Chairperson, SUGC. Adding courses is not permitted in the summer term. However, students
may drop a course up to two weeks prior to the last day of classes for the summer course. 3.4 National Ports Organisation (NPO)
Students must register for any one of these activities (NSO) during the first two semesters as a
mandatory requirement.
NSO is a compulsory requirement for men for the first two smelters. The choice will be based on the
aptitude of the student for any of these activities and will be decided by a committee constituted
for the purpose. Normal registration must be done for any one of these activities only at the
beginning of the first two semesters, along with other courses. Once registered for one of these
activities, no change will be permitted at a later stage. His requirement must be completed before
the end of the second year. In cases where valid reasons exist, a student may be given special
permission for completion of this requirement before the end of the third year, failing which they
will not be permitted to register for the courses of the fourth year. A student will be awarded
(Pass) grade for this activity in each smelter provided the minimum requirement of this activity
is met during that semester, together with 80% minimum attendance failing, which the grade of
(Not Pass) will be given. The award of the degree is subject to the successful completion of NSO.
In addition to the above mandatory requirements, students are also permitted to take NSO in
subsequent years. His facility is specially meant for students interested in NSO activities.
3.5. Courses in the unscheduled smelter
In cases where the number of repeated or backlogged courses is five or more, the Faculty Coordinator of
The concerned programme may consider offering such a course additional time, although it
may not be seated to run during that smelter, subject to timetable constraints and availability.
willingness of a faculty member. Such a proposal should come from the PUGC and be approved.
by the mean (of). The rules that govern overcoats will be strictly observed when letting students
register for such courses.
3.6 Grant of Leave/Semester Drop on Medical Round
3.6.1: Did-Semester Recess and Vacation: Undergraduate students are entitled to avail themselves of the mid-
smelter recess, winter, and summer vacation as specified in the academic calendar without
seeking any permission.
3.6.2: Short Leave: Leave of absence during the smelter is discouraged for all registered
students. However, for bone-side reasons, a student may apply for leave. The extent of this leave
for medical reasons can be a maximum of ten working days per smelter. A maximum of five
Working days of leave may also be granted for any other valid reason. In no case may a student
be granted leave of absence in excess of fifteen working days in a smelter. The leave of
absence in the summer term shall correspondingly be five working days (medical) and three
working days (others), i.e., eight working days total. Pp action for leave of absence may be
submitted to the academic office through the faculty coordinator.
3.6.3: Temporary Withdrawal or Semester Leave: A student may be allowed a leave of absence.
for a whole smelter (temporary withdrawal) for bone-side reasons. Such leave of absence shall
ordinarily not exceed two smelters with or without breaks during the entire period of the academic
programme. (a) An application for temporary withdrawal should be made before the date of
registration for the semester as mentioned in the academic calendar. However, under
exceptional circumstances, a student may apply for withdrawal daytime during the semester. (b)
Applications for temporary withdrawal should be addressed to the Mean and routed through the
Department Coordinator and Faculty Adviser It should be submitted to the academic office with
supporting documents such as a medical certificate (in original) in case of an illness. (c) A student
who remains on authorised leave of absence due to ill health shall be required to submit a
certificate from a Registered Medical Practitioner, ratified by the IIT Goa to the effect that
s/he is sufficiently cured and is fit to resume her/his studies. The registration of the student shall
be provisional until the medical officer determines the fitness. In the event that the
that the student is not yet fit to resume studies, the registration may be canceled. 3.6.4: Penalty for Sanctioned or Excessive Leave: A student is found to be absent from class.
without anti-one leave, then the course instructor may recommend registration of the
student from the course. The policy regarding sanctioned leave leading to de-registration or
Any other consequence must be declared by the instructor at the beginning of the course.
rule applies to courses in regular schools as well as in the summer term. A student is found
to be absent from a majority of lectures, tutorials, and laboratory sessions for more than 20
working days (not necessarily contiguous) in a smelter, with or without sanction, then her or his
Registration for all the courses at that school may be cancelled by the Senate on recommendation.
of SUGC, resulting in a forced smelter drop. A student is found to be absent from all academic
activities in a smelter without authorization for more than 30 working days continuously, or
does not appear, without a compelling reason, for the end-smelter examinations in all the
courses in which s/he is registered, then her/his programme will be terminated.
4. Examine Tone or Assessment
4.1 Attendance
Attendance in classes is compulsory and will be monitored. A student not having a minimum of
80 percent attendance (a standard of attendance may be announced by the course instructor)
before the commencement of the semester) may be barred from appearing in the semester.
end examination and given a grade, and such a student has to re-register for the same course. In
In general, the institute expects 100% attendance, and at least 80% attendance in the course is
permitted on medical grounds or other emergency conditions. A medical certain fichte from
IIT Goa Health, or a government hospital (to be endorsed by the IIT Goa)
necessary for getting leave on health or medical grounds.
4.2 Nodes of Assessment
The two modes of assessment used for rating students' performance in a lecture course
include quizzes, class tests (open or closed book), home assignments, seminars, and group
assignment, viva-voice, mid-smelter examination, and the smelter-end examination. The
The distribution of weightage for the assessment through the various modes listed above will normally
be the following:
There will be one mid-smelter test of two hours’ duration for each course to be held as per the
schedule fixed in the academic calendar, and during such examination period, there will be no
classes held. In addition, two quires (or one quit and one test) and/or assignment or viva-voice
shall make up the rest of the in-smelter assignment. The relative weight would be
Approximately 30 percent went for the mid-smelter test, 20 percent for the two quizzes or tests.
assignment/viva—voice and active participation in discussions in the classroom. For active
participation, the instructor may set aside up to a maximum of 10 percent of the total marks. Oh e
The relative weightage for the smelter-end examination would be 50 percent. However, the
The instructor has discretionary powers as per the course, and the same will be announced at the
beginning of the smelter. The end-of-semester examination will cover the full syllabus of the
course. The end-smelter examination is compulsory for all students. The assessment in
The laboratory course will be based on turn-to-turn supervision of the student's work, their
performance in viva-voice examinations and group discussions, the quality of their work as
prescribed through laboratory journals and an end-smelter test that contains an experiment or
a written exam. For a laboratory course, in-smelter work will normally carry 75%, and the end
smelter test at 25% weightage, respectively.
However, the instructor may change the distribution of marks between the in-semester and end-semester.
semester evaluation. The instructor will announce the mode of evaluation and distribution.
of marks at the beginning of the course. It is obligatory to maintain a labortory journal as
prescribed by the course instructor. The final examination for laboratory courses will normally be
held a week before the final theory examination. 4.3 Trading
i) For every C course taken by a student, they are assigned a grade based on their combined
performance over the smelter in all the assessments in that course. These grades are
described by the letters of, of, of, of, of, of, of, and of, each of which is not
only indicates a quantitative assessment of the student's performance but also carries a
quantitative (numerical) equivalent called the grade point, as given below:

Letter Trade Numerical (grade point) Remarks
of 10

Letter trades and equivalent numerical trades of 10
of 09
of 08
of 07
of 06
of 05
of 04
of 00 Eligible for one re-exam
of 00 Repeat the course.
of -- Nail (back of attendance—repeat the course)
of incomplete (on health grounds)
of -- dropped
of -- Passed
of -- Not Passed
of the Audit Course

A student passes the course if they get any grade in the range of of to of, but fails if they get
the grade of, of, or of. The grade indicates ‘course dropped'. However, the minimum passing
grade in each stage of the dual degree project assessment shall be “of”.
ii). A student is awarded a fail grade if their performance in the course is poor. They are
eligible for 50% weightage in the re-exam, only once, immediately following the end-see.
examination as per the timetable announced by the Academic Section. Of absence for such re-
examination for any reason, the student will be awarded “of” grade. Study it with an
is not eligible for re-examination in that course and has to re-register for that course whenever it
is offered. The maximum grade offered for a re-exam is
iii). A grade will be awarded in cases where, in the opinion of the instructor, the student hasn't
had adequate academic exposure to the course and should therefore repeat the course.
A grade may also be awarded in cases of minor malpractice in examinations or assessments. A
A student who’s in-smelter performance is very poor may be awarded the ‘of' grade by the
instructor, even if they had missed the end-smelter examination due to any reason.
v). The grade in a course is awarded if a student does not maintain at least 80% attendance.
in the lecture or tutorial classes. The of glades may also be awarded to the students having bad
or incomplete in smelter records for non-medical reasons. The grade will be declared in the
first week of November for the autumn semester courses and in the first week of April for spring
Semester hours are (in general, one week before the semester-end exam).
A student with a poor grade in a given course is not permitted to take the semester-end examination.
in that course. Such a student has to re-register for the same course whenever it is offered. vi). In
In addition to the above grades, there is also an incomplete grade ‘of' which is awarded in a
lecture or lab course if a student has satisfactory student performance but has not appeared
for the end-smelter examination on medical grounds. The student is entitled to 50 marks.
examination given at the end of the particular smelter. ‘of' grade will be converted into a performance grade (depending on the overall performance in the course) after the re-
examination.
To be discussed with Prof. Vistas
4.4. Examination due to illness or accident
If the student misses the examination due to personal illness or accident, his application for re-
examination must be supported by a proper medical certificate duly approved by the medical
Authority of the Indian state In the event of the death or serious illness of a parent or guardian, the
The application should be supported by adequate evidence of the same routed through the faculty.
Adviser/PUGC The student should submit the medical certificate to the academic office. A ny
A student who fails to apply for re-examination in the prescribed manner will be deemed to have
failed in those courses and will be awarded a grade. They will be required to repeat those
courses.
4.5 To fail policy
SPI/CPI
4.5.1 Semester Performance Index (SPI)
Semester Performance Index (SPI)
The performance of a student in a school is indicated by a number called Semester
Performance Index (SPI. The SPI is the weighted average of the grade points obtained in all the
courses registered by the student during the semester. For example, if a student passes five
courses (theory, laws, projects, seminars, etc.) in a smelter with credits of Of, Of, Of, and Of
and her/his grade points in these courses are go, go, go, go, and respectively, then her/his SPI
is equal to:
C1g1 + Of go + Of go + Of go + Of go
SPI = ――――――――― ―――― ――
Of + Of + Of + Of + Of

The SPI is calculated to two denial places. The SPI for any smelter will take this into consideration.
the grades awarded in that school. For example, if a student has failed in course 4, the
SPI will then be computerised as:
C1g1 + Of go + Of go + Of * ZERO + Of go
SPI = ――――――――― ―――― ――
Of + Of + Of + Of + Of
The courses that do not meet the minimum requirements of the degrees will not
be considered for the calculation of the SPI, such as additional courses undertaken and the grades
earned by the student will be shown separately.

4.5.2 Cumulative Performance Index (CPI)
In an up-to-date assessment of the overall performance of a student from the time s/he entered the
The institute is obtained by calculating a number called the Cumulative Performance Index, or CPI, in a
manner similar to the calculation of SPI. The CPI therefore considers all the co-uses registered.
by the student towards the minimum requirement of the degree s/he has enrolled in or, since s/he
entered the institute. The CPI is calculated at the end of every smelter to two denial places.
and is indicated in Smelter grade reports. The CPI will reflect the failed status in the case of
grade(s), till the course(s) is/are cleared. The course(s) are cleared by obtaining a pass.
grade on subsequent registration(s), the CPI will only reflect the new grade and not the fail grades.
earned earlier. Example: Up to now, a student has registered for n courses, among which s/he has a "of."
grade in the course i. The smelter grade report at the end of smelter r therefore will contain a
CPI is calculated as:
C1g1 + Of go + Of go +... +I* ZERO +In in
CPI = ――――――――― ―――― ――
Of + Of + Of +... +I +
... + In
Even if a student has failed in a course more than once, the course will figure only once in the
numerator as well as the denomination. It is the end of smelter r+1 s/he has registered for four
more courses using the backing course and has cleared all the courses, including the backing
Of course, the CPI at the end of this smelter is calculated as
C1g1 + Of go + Of go +... +I*i+..+ In in
CPI = ――――――――― ―――― ――
Of + Of + Of +... +I +... + In
The courses that do not meet the minimum requirements of the degrees will not be considered.
for the calculation of the basic CPI. These courses will be shown separately, and a separate CPI will
be created for these courses. There will also be a combined CPI calculated, which considers
all the credits earned by the student. At the end of each semester, the grade report, which reflects
The performance of the student in that school is sent to the face-to-face adviser of the respective
student, a copy to the concerned student, and a copy to the parent is also sent to their respective
addresses by post and email.
4.5.4 Complications of Failing Grades on CPI
The CPI will reflect all courses taken by the student, including those in which they failed. Thus,
of and of grade will affect the CPI and SPI of the student. In case of grades, CPI will be
calculated on the basis of the grade obtained by the student on a successful attempt at the re-exam
which will be restricted to
4.6 Nail and Incomplete Trades (Conversion Rule)
4.6.1 ‘of' Trade
Only students with a satisfactory and complete in-smelter record but who miss the end
smelter exam for reasons set out as acceptable in Rule 4.4, should be given an A.
However, in case the student fails to appear for the re-examination on missile grounds,
The student shall be considered to have dropped the course. Of the reasons for absence at the
exam is not supported by a medical certificate, the grade awarded will be revised to
Thus, the grade gets converted to one of the following: (i) ‘of' (course dropped, as above), (ii)
‘of' in case of poor performance or justified absence, for the re-exam, and (iii) a pass grade.
depending on the student's performance. The grade will therefore not be continued beyond the
smelter-end re-examinations.
4.6.2 ‘D X' Trade
In ‘of' grade is treated as equivalent to ‘of' for the purpose of CPI calculation, and the following
Criteria in addition to poor attendance (less than 80%) may be considered for the award of
grade: (i) Badly incomplete in-smelter record (due to non-medical reasons) {for example, in the
case of a student who has missed all tests and midterms, etc. (ii) Misconduct or use of unfair means
in the examination, assignment, etc., of a nature serious enough to invite disciplinary action in
the opinion of the instructor. It is emphasised that the award of the grade is in the nature of an
immediate action in such cases, and the case may be referred to the SSAC (Senate Students).
Advisory Committee) for consideration of further punishment depending on the seriousness of
the offense).  The names and roll numbers of students to be awarded the grade should be communicated to the academic office as per the academic calendar in advance of the end of the semester.
examination.
4.6.3 of and of grades
i). The in-smelter performance of all students should be displayed and sent to the academic office.
by the instructor before the end-smelter examination. Those awarded ‘of' grades as described
above will be clearly identified in this list as per the academic calendar.
ii). Based on the in-smelter performance, the instructor also decides and publishes a cut-off.
(based on the average performance of the class), above which the in-class performance is
considered ‘Satisfactory'. (His limit would be similar to the lower limb t for the grade.) iii) A
A student with a'satisfactory'  in-smelter performance should not be given an ‘of' grade in the
overall assessment. Such a student, in the event of overall poor performance (not passing),
should be given an ‘of' grade and a chance at re-examination. The maximum grade obtainable
Such re-examination is limited to It is thus calcified that grades of and of are place holders.
only, and do not enter into CPI or SPI calculations directly. These grades get converted to one of
the regal ar grades after the smelter-end re-examinations. However, grades are
given for different reasons and have direct consequences for SPI and CPI.
4.6.4 Policies on disclosing the evacuated end-smelter answer books, period of retention,
and re-evaluate it.
A course instructor should allow students to see the evacuated answer script at their discretion.
as long as this is done before the finalisation of grades. The limit fixed for such a disclosure is three.
days before the last date for receiving grades in the Academic Office. The time and venue will be
decided and conveyed by the course instructor.
There is a provision for requesting a re-total of Is. 200 per course. Such
Requests will be processed by the Academic Office.
Any change in grade requires the approval of the Chairman of the Senate.
Once grades are published, changes, if any, will be allowed in cases of totaling and lobulation.
errors only. A request for re-totalling must be made by the student to the academic office using the
prescribed form, which will be sent to faculty for further action. Students must not contact faculty.
directly.
The evacuated answer script should be preserved by the instructor or departmental office for
minimum period of one smelter.

4.7 He-examination (50% weightage)
Students obtaining a grade in a course will have only one chance to clear the course.
by re-examination. His re-examination will be of 50% weight and will be held immediately.
Following the main examination, another 50% will be from the end smelter examination. The
Trading will be done in the same way as is done in the end (see examination). The maximum
The grade obtainable with a re-exam is outlined below:
4.7.1 He-examination for students who are awarded “of” grade but have attended a major part of
the in-smelter assessment and whose performance is good enough to justify a re-examination.
or in the case of students getting an ‘of' grade and whose absence from the school-end
examination is on valid grounds, you will be permitted to take the re-examination. He examined his sons.
are held towards the end of the winter vacation for those who missed the first semester (autumn).
examination and towards the end of the summer vacation for those who missed the second
smelter (spring) examination. After re-examination, the student is entitled to an appropriate
grade on the basis of their in-smelter and re-examination performance. There will be no grade.
restriction. If the student misses the re-examination due to medical reasons, the grade will be converted to drop (of) and/or if the student misses the re-examination due to non-medical
reason, the OF grade will be converted to OF, and the student will have to repeat the course.
4.7.2 He-examination due to
Those students who are awarded an “of” grade may be permitted to take the re-examination. He-
Examinations are held towards the end of the winter vacation for those who failed in the first semester.
(Autumn) examination and towards the end of the summer vacation for those who failed in
second smelter (spring) examination. In such a re-exam nation, if the student passes, the
The maximum grade obtainable shall be limited to, and if the student misses or fails, the grade
shall get converted into, and the student will have to repeat the course.
4.8 Treatment of Malpractice or Unfair Means
grade may be awarded to those students found or reported for malpractice or using unfair means.
in an examination or assessment. In addition to this, the decision of the SSAC in such
Matters will be final and binding.
5. Special features in registration
5.1 Carrying backlogs forward
Every student must register for a minimum of credits per semester as prescribed by PUGC.
Normally, students should register for the backing courses at the first available opportunity.
However, the faculty adviser may advise the students appropriately to drop the backing.
course in favour of the prerequisite course in order to avoid a case-setting effect in subsequent
smelters. The faculty advisers and PUGCs should exercise special care and assist the students.
in this regard.
5.2 Audit Course
Auditing of courses by undergraduate students during regular semesters and the summer term
is permitted under the following conditions:
i) Students with CPI 7.5 and above will be permitted to ‘audit' the course. However, this would
be restricted to a maximum of two courses during the entire period of the programme. (ii))The students
You have to enter the courses to be united in the Course Registrar Form while registering for the
smelter. The course will not carry any credits. The word “audit” would be specially mentioned.
in the remarks column of the student's course registration form. Prior permission from the instructor
is required. iii) The ST debts would be required to have a minimum of 80% attendance in the audit.
course.
iv) The ‘of' grade would be awarded by the instructor if the attendance is satisfactory and
requirements set out by the instructor are met. Students will be expected to complete the
smelter assessment. If the attendance and performance are not satisfactory, the course will
not appear at all on the grade card.
v) Students can audit a course, provided the course is offered and the timetable slot permits.
vi) The course done by auditing will not be considered for the purposes of the calculation of SPI or CPI.
but will be reflected in the semester trade report as an audit course.
5.3 Guided Study
The capable students will be provided the option of guided study to acquire proficiency in an area of
through doing courses outside their curriculum in a self-study-like mode. His option
is also subject to the availability and willingness of the instructor offering the course. Such an
option will be available to students with a CPI of 8.5 or more, to the extent of a maximum of one
course per semester in the third and subsequent years, on the recommendation of the faculty
adviser/project guide, PUGC, and approval of SUGC. His option is called ‘Guided Study' to distinguish it from the existing self-study mode, which is largely meant for students to clear
backlogs in the curriculum. Further, even with respect to these courses, the rules that govern
overlooking apply strictly. The guided study option may be used on a case-by-case basis with
prior approval of SUGC. The registration, examination, etc. will be similar to a self-study course.
The evaluation for the guided study will be done in a similar way as it is for a normal smelter.
courses (i.e., 50% for in-smelter performance and 50% for end-smelter performance e).
His option will also be made available in the following special situations, provided CPI
requirement is fulfilled:
(a) Students who miss the ‘Departmental Introductory Course' due to a change of branch
obtained at the end of the year.
(b) Students dropping an entire smelter due to medical reasons.
5.4. Repeating a course
A student is required to repeat a course completely in the following situations:
i) When he gets an of, of, or of grade in a course.
ii) A student with a poor grade in a course can avail only 50% marks in the examination in that course.
immediately after the end-of-smelter examination. If a student fails the re-examination or does
not appear for the re-examination for any reason, they will be awarded a grade, and in that case,
They have to re-register (repeat) the course.
iii) When a student who gets an ‘of' grade fails to apply or does not appear for a
examination giving valid medical reasons for absence at the end of the smelter examination on the
grade is awarded automatically to such a course.
iv) When a student gets an “of” grade and subsequently becomes eligible for re-
examination does not appear on the scheduled date, for any non-medical reason, the grade ‘of' is
automatically convert ED into a grade.
v) Students are permitted to overcoat on account of a backing laboratory or drawing course only up
to 3 credits during a regular semester where the course is being offered with prior permission of
the SUGC provided there is no clash in the SITS.
5.5 Course Substitution
Normally, substitution of one course (in which one obtains an of or of grades) by another is
discouraged.
However, substitution may be permitted in the cases of D, X, and O in the same group of courses.
as given in the courses of the STDY bulletin, subject to the following conditions:
5.6. If it is a core or compulsory course, there will be no substitution, and the same course must
be repeated.
5.6.1 In the case of an I institute elective course, it may be substituted by another I institute.
elective only.
5.6.2 If it is a departmental elective, it may be substituted by another departmental elective course.
from the same group.
5.7 Overloading of Courses:
Students with a CPI of 8.5 or above (irrespective of any backlogs) may be permitted to take 1
course per smelter as an overcoat, provided the timetable permits. There will be no relaxation.
of the CPI criterion. A change of status from credit to audit in respect of such courses may be
allowed up to the mid-smelter examination. It should, however, be with the prior approval of
the SUGC. However, the students may be allowed to overtake a course in the regular smelter from FIFTH.
smelter onwards to clear backing course(s) with prior approval of the SUGC, subject to
minimum CPI of 6.5 and time-table slot availability. There shall be no further relaxation of CPI.
criterion.
5.8 Self-Study
To enable a student to complete the course credit requirements at the end of the year for B.
Tech, a student with backing of only one or two courses may take self-study courses after
taking the necessary approval from SUGC.
An application for self-study has to be made to SUGC in the prescribed form, which should be
signed by the supervising teacher who may examine him from time to time, apart from an
exam nation at the end of the course. The duration of the self-study course is between 8 and 10.
weeks. The course should be completed and the grade B obtained in the smelter in which the
Registration is done. There is no carryover of the self-study course from one semester to another.
The SUGC will consider each application for self-study on its merits and will restrict the total
number of such courses to only two during the entire programme of a student, the credits for a
The self-study-studye is the same as the regular course and will be taken into account.
while calculating the total credits in a smelter, which should not exceed the normal load. These
Courses are subject to the availability and willingness of concerned faculty members.
Opportunities for clearing backlogs may become available through summer courses and by
running courses in unscheduled smelters.
However, for the self-study option, the following directive will be followed:
(a) The self-study option will strictly be restricted to B.Tech.  students in the summer.
of the final year, and for a maximum of two courses.
(b) The restriction on students with or without a grade in a subject not being eligible for the
self-study option For that course, it may be waived by the departments if only two courses are
remaining for completion of the degree. Otherwise, instructors or departments may insist that the
Concerned students should repeat the course in a later regular semester without taking a course.
as self-study.
(c) Academic standards must be vigorously maintained in the self-study mode. A request for
The self-study option must be in the prescribed form available in the academic office.
(d) The registration, examination, etc. will be as per academic standards. The evaluation for
Self-study will be done in the same way as in a normal Smelter course. (i.e., 50% for in-
smelter performance and 50% for end-smelter performance.)
5.9 Summer Courses
The summer course facility provides the opportunity for the students to clear their backlogs by
re-doing courses with adequate rigour, provided it is offered. A minimum number of five students
should register for a course, and the faculty concerned should also agree to run the course in a
summer. A student is never permitted to register for more than 18 credits during any one
summer term. Students are also not permitted to re-register for courses that they have already taken.
obtained a pass grade or more.
To be discussed
The registration, examination, etc. will be as per the academic calendar, and the evaluation will be
done in the same way as is done for normal smelter courses (i.e., 50% for in-smelter
performance and 50% for end-smelter performance). 5.10 Change of Branch
Students are eligible to apply for a change of branch or programme after completing the first two
smelters. The following rules and guidelines are used for considering their applications for change:
1. Registered students will be permitted to apply for a change of branch without any
constraint.
2. For others, change will be permitted strictly on a merit basis. Students without failing grades
and backlogs, and with a CPI ≥ 6.5, will be eligible to apply and can give their choice.
3. The request for change (in the order of merit) for student Of from department A to
Department B will be considered if
(a) The strength of Department B does not exceed the sanctioned strength. (b) Number of students
on roll in department A does not fall below 85% of the sanctioned strength.
(c) The request of Of will be re-considered (again in the order of merit) if Of does not
violate (b) above due to another student getting transferred to department A.
4. A student is not permitted to change from department A to B (due to (b) above), any
Other students who went with CPI less than Of will also not be permitted to change departments.
B.
5. The requests for change of branch or programme from students belonging to
category may be considered special cases by the Chairman of the Senate on merit.
6. All such transfers can be effected only once at the beginning of the second academic year.
year. To apply for a change of branch or programme during the subsequent academic
years will be entertained.
To be discussed with Prof. Vistas
6. Seminars and Projects
The project is a course requirement, wherein, under the guidance of a faculty member, a final year
student is required to do some innovative work with the application of knowledge earned while
undergoing various courses and laws in the earlier years. The student is expected to do a
literature survey and carry out development and/or experimentation. Through the project's work,
The student has to exhibit both analytical and practical skills.
The student will have to do their project under the guidance of a faculty member from the same
department unless specifically permitted by the department coordinator or faculty adviser for
alternate arrangements. The project for B.Tech is specifically structured.
The B.Tech project is done in the final year and is divided into two stages. Normally the
The first stage is done in the autumn semester, and the second stage is in the subsequent spring.
smelter. The project carries an aggregate of 20 credits (St. Stage 5, and Stage 15).
Every student has to undertake a seminar or course of professional interest as per the requirements of
the department. These may be related to theoretical analysis, an experimental investigation, or a
prototype design, a new correlation and analysis of data, fabrication, and the set of a new
equipment or a comb nation of some of these. The final project report should be submitted by the
prescribed date, usually three weeks before the end of the final smelter. The report is evacuated by
a panel of examiners consisting of the chairman, external examiner, internal examiner, guide, and
To guide wherever applicable, and an oral examination is conducted after the smelter-end
examination. The assessment of the project work is done on the following basis: The preliminary
presentation (the first stage) carries 25% of the total weightage. Another 25% weight is given for
the initiative, interest, effort, and regularity shown by the student during the project work. The
The remaining 50% weight is assigned to the oral examination conducted by the Panel of
Examines. Programme-wise details are outlined below: 6.1 B.Tech. Project
(a) To avoid problems in scheduling various assessments that require presentations by students
towards the end of the semester with respect to the seminar or project,
(i). The topic will be given by the end of the previous smelter, and
(ii) The evaluation will be carried out by the department as per convenience, after allowing for a
minimum of 10 weeks of work during the smelter.
(b) Issues relating to project evaluation: The rules for seminar/project evaluation are as detailed as
below:

i. Each stage will be evacuated separately and graded. ii. The guide will ensure that the work
carried out by the student is adequate before giving approval for submission of the project report.
for evaluation.
iii. The guide may award an ‘of' grade (at least 1 month in advance of stage evaluation).
in case the student has been irregular in interactions and work (a student is expected to have at
least one meeting every week with the guide).
iv. In special situations (such as prolonged health problems or delays in getting facilities), the
guide may recommend to SUGC (through PUGC) an extension of a maximum of one month for
submission and evaluation without any penalty.
v. The examination panel consisting of the chairman, internal examiner, guide, and to-guide may
award a fail grade (of or of) for poor performance and/or inadequate work. In the case of an
The student can appear again after 1 month by submitting a fresh report; in this case, the
The maximum possible grade will be restricted, as in the case of courses.
vi. The student will be required to register a fresh for the stage in case of D X and of
grades. In cases of graded summers, registration may be permitted by SUGC on a case-by-case basis.
basis, on the justified recommendation of PUGC. However, registration during the summer is not
permissible in the case of a D-X grade.
vii. A grade may be awarded if the student misses the evaluation on medical grounds.
In which case, a re-examination will be held within one month.
viii. In cases of delayed project submission other than those in (iv) above, the maximum
permissible grade is of
ix. ‘Students who do not drop the project in time and do not submit the project report for
assessment by the due date, will be temporarily awarded ‘of' grade at the time of finalisation of
grades for all the other students. The ‘of' grade will be converted to a performance grade, not
higher than when these students submit their reports, though late, and undergo the
examination. Thus, students submitting their project reports late will only be entitled to the grades.
of, of, of, and of after the oral assessment. Further, if such late reports are not submitted,
Within a reasonable period of time (by the end of the S summer semester), the ‘of' grade will be
automatically converted to ‘of'.
7. Internship
In order to enhance the industry-academic partnership and improve placement opportunities
For IIT Goa, students have to visit an industry or research lab for a duration of six months. The 6
A six-month internship will be offered to the students based on departmental recommendations. The
Course works can be adjusted accordingly so that the syllabus is made available for the students.
to avail of a 6-month internship in an industry or a research lab. Those who are not interested in an
industrial internship, and those who did not receive any internships will work on an academic
project at the institute. In order to ensure the scientific quality of internships and to facilitate
uniform grey king, an internship advisory committee will be formed for each department. During
In the selection process itself, the companies are expected to provide details of the project as well.
as duties of the student so that the committee can evaluate the quality of the proposed work. After being selected, a guide from both IIT Goa and industry will be allotted. The faculty guide will interact.
with the industry counterpart for continuously monitoring the progress. It is the end of the
During the internship period, each student must submit a project report and make a presentation to the
department-specific evaluation committee. Trades will be given based on the quality report and
presentation as well as on the feedback from the supervisor from the industry.
8.0 Performance Requirements
8.1 ward of degree
The B.Tech. degree in the relevant branch of engineering or in a relevant branch of engineering
will be conferred on a student in a conviction.
However, for a degree, a student has to fulfil the following requirements:
a) The student should have taken and passed all the prescribed courses under the general
Institutional and departmental requirements.
b) The student should have satisfactorily fulfilled other academic requirements, like practical
training, NSO, work visits, semi-war, and the project.
c) The student should have paid all the institute dues.
d) The student should have no case of discipline against him or her.
Although CPI will be given in the semester grade reports, the final degree certificate will not
mention any class whatsoever.

8.2 Wards of Medals
Various medals are awarded to the outstanding students among the graduates who
receive their degree at the annual conviction of the institute. The President of India Medal
The Institute Old Medal is awarded to the most outstanding student in the undergraduate
programme (B. Tech) admitted through JEE (Conditions and Procedures as approved by the
(Senate from time to time applies.)
The Institute Silver Medal is awarded to the most outstanding graduate in each batch of
Engineering other than the one to which the recipient of the President of India Medal and the
Institute Old Medal belongs. Only such students who have completed the programme without
Dropping or failing in any of the minimum credit-carrying courses are considered eligible for the
award of medals.
8.3 Minimum Semester Performance
There shall be no minimum CPI requirement for the award of the B.Tech., but the eligibility for
The award of degrees to the students with a CPI less than 5.00 would have to be approved by the
Chairman, Senate. However, such cases will be reported to the Senate.
8.4 Low Track Option
For students with up to four backlogs (of/of) at the end of first and second years, a separate
A slow-track-trackamme should be worked out by the cult adviser and approved by SUGC.
to enable him/her to complete the degree requirements over a longer-than-normal duration.
(considering the maximum duration indicated in 8.5) The performance of such students should
be monitored on a regular basis and make the requisite corrections to the programme as warranted.
should be made from time to time. Students having grades (in up to four courses)
advised to opt for the slow-track option in their own interest, in consultation with their faculty advisers.
They will be at risk of early termination if more backlogs accumulate.
8.5 Presidency Requirements (Maximum Period for Programme mpletion)
In any case, a student should fulfil the requirements for their respective degree within the
maximum period specified for the programme as given below, including withdrawal in exceptional
circumstances, failing which their case will be referred to the Senate for dismissal: B.Tech. programme: twelve semesters (six ars)
8.6 Termination Criteria
The academic performance of each student is reviewed by the SUGC/SPGC at the end of
Each regular student at IIT Goa is always expected to maintain at least a
minimum level of performance

A deficient student may be placed on academic probation or warning, or their academic programme
may be terminated as per the rules in place.

The criteria for placing students on warning, academic probation, and programme termination
are as follows,

For the registered students to date,

Met ‘P’ be the total number of credits the student required to be completed until the last
smelter, starting from the first smelter, ‘Q’ be the total number of credits the student
has earned in the preceding semesters, ‘R’ be the total number of credits the student
has registered in the last smelter, and ‘S’ is the total number of credits the student
has earned in the last smelter.

When,

A student will be placed on an academic probation or warning in the next semester if
Either or both of the following conditions are satisfied.

Condition I: 𝑄≤ 2
3 P

Condition of: 𝑆≤0.5R
A student on warning or academic probation is required to sign an undertaking.
incorporating the following conditions:

a) The/he shall register with higher priority for those courses (or their substitute) in
which grade is obtained.

b) The/he shall not hold any office in the All of Residence, Students Gymkhana or
any other organization or body.

c) Any other terms and conditions laid down by the SUGC/He name.

d) The parents or guardians of these students are required to countersign this
undertaking. A student is unable to meet these terms and conditions due to some
genuine reasons, she or he must explain this to the PUGC before the smelter.
ends.

A student already on academic probation or warning satisfies either or both of the above:
mentioned conditions at the end of the current smelter, then the Academic Programme of
The student will be terminated.

Appeal Against Termination

A student whose pro-choice is terminated may appeal to the Hairman, Senate, for
restatement in the programme. In cases of termination due to inadequate academic
performance, the student should clearly explain the reason(s) for poor performance, including how
Those reasons will not adversely affect her or his performance in the future. The Senate shall take a
final decision after considering all available input. A student may reappear even after a previous
appeal has been rejected. However, the Senate may not entertain any re-appeal for review unless
substantial additional information is brought to its attention. 9. Miscellaneous
9.1 Helping weaker students
The students with backlogs will be required to register mentally. His will requires
them to meet and discuss with the faculty adviser. The students with backlogs should
continuously seek help from the faculty adviser and the student counsellor, and also be in constant
touch with parents about their performance. The Institute will also communicate with the
parents or guardians ago about the performance of their ward school wisely or annually. His is with the
intention that the guardians of the students having backlogs should be made aware of the
performance of their wards, and it is expected that they should keep in constant touch with the faculty.
adviser and the concerned Head of the Department, and if necessary, the student's counselor.
9.2 Faculty Adviser
In joining the institute, a student or a group of students is assigned to a faculty adviser. The
Students are expected to consult the faculty adviser on many matters relating to their academic
performance and the courses they may take in various semesters or summer terms. The idea of a
The faculty adviser has evolved to extend guidance to the students, enabling them to complete
their courses of study for the required degree in a smooth and satisfactory manner. Thus, the
The role of the faculty adviser is of immense importance. The faculty adviser is the person to whom
the parents/guardians should contact for performance related issues o f their ward. In view of the
guidance to the students The role of faculty adviser is outlined below:
1. Guidance about the rules and regulations governing the courses of study for a particular
degree.
2. The faculty adviser registers the students for courses within the scope of the advice.
given by the Senate Undergraduate Committee (SUGC).
3. He is also authorised to permit the students to drop or adjust one or more courses for which
They may have registered.
4. May special attention be given to weak students.
5. Take a revised (unloading/unloading) plan of study for weak or bright students based on
their smelter performance.
6. Suggest localities for course and credit requirements for the students recommended for
exchange Programme.
7. Guidance and liaison with parents of ST events for their performances.
9.3 Academic Calendar
The academic activities of the institute are regulated by an academic calendar approved by the
Senate from time to time and made available to the students, faculty members, and all other
concerned in print and/or electronic form. It is mandatory for students and faculty to strictly
adhere to the academic calendar for completion of academic activities.
10. Glossary:
 PUGC: Programme Undergraduate Committee
 SUGC: Senate Undergraduate Committee
 CRF: Your SE Registration Form
 CAF: Course Adjustment Form
 of: Faculty Adviser
 Course List: List of students registered for a course
 Semester: approximately 16 weeks’ duration each, the first one (Autumn Semester)
from the last week of July to the last week of November, and the second one (Spring
Semester) from the first week of January to the last week of April.
 Summer Term: approximately 8 weeks’ duration from the first week of May to the first
week of July, mainly to facilitate students to clear backing of lecture and laboratory courses,
if any.  Course Credit (C): weighted sum of the number of lecture hours (L), tutorial hours (T),
Practical hours (P) associated with the course
 Registration: The total of course credits for which the student has registered during a
smelter.
 Semester Credits: The sum of credits for courses registered by the student in a smelter.
 Credits Warned: The sum of course credits for credit courses in which a student has
passed in a smelter.
 Trade: qualitative assessment of the student's performance in a course indicated by the
letters, of, of, A, B, of, of, of, of, of, of, of, of, or of trade. D X or of
indicates that the student has to repeat the course. of indicates the course dropped.
 Trade point: number equivalent of the letter grades given by 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4.
corresponding to of and of, of, of, of, of, of , and of respectively. of, of,D X
carry zero grade points; of, of, and of do not carry any grade points.
 Instructor: Member of faculty who reaches courses or laws.
 Door: Less than 30% in the in-smelter performance.
 Very Door: Less than 20% in the in -smelter performance.
 Semester Trade Joints: The sum of the products of credits and trade joints for each
course registered by a student in a smelter.
 SPI: Semester Performance Index, which is obtained by dividing the Semester Trade
Joints by the Semester Credits
 Cumulative Credits: Sum of the Merester Credits for all the smelters taken together,
wherein the credits of a course are not counted if an alternative course has been taken in
lieu of it.
 Cumulative Trade Joints: Sum of the Semester Trade Joints for all the smelters taken
together, wherein the credits of a course are not counted if an alternative course has been
taken in lieu of it.
 CPI: Cumulative Performance Index, which is obtained by dividing the cumulative trade
Joints by the Cumulative Credits