INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GOA POST GRADUATE MANUAL Ph.D. Rules and Regulations The Institute offers facilities for work leading to a Ph.D. in various research areas. IIT Goa offers a Ph.D. program in a wide range of areas in engineering, science, and humanities and social sciences from the academic year 2018–19. The broad objectives of the Ph.D. program are to keep pace with the expanding frontiers of knowledge and to provide research training relevant to the present technical, scientific, social, and economic technological and scientific objectives of the country. The academic program leading to the Ph.D. degree is broad-based. It will involve a minimum course credit requirement and a research thesis. The institute will also encourage research in interdisciplinary areas through a system of joint supervision and interdepartmental group activities. The presence of a strong research-tormented faculty provides excellent upper unites for such a program. The Institute intends to undertake sponsored research and development projects from industrial and other organizations in the public and private sectors. Facilities for research work leading to the Oh A D degree will be made liable in all the science, engineering, humanities, and social sciences departments and schools. In addition to the facilities available in the laboratories and workshops of his or her own department or school, a Ph.D. scholar will also have access to the central facilities available elsewhere in the institute. Several departmental and institute-level seminars will be held throughout the year. A large number of distinguished scientists and engineers, both from India and abroad, will be invited to visit the Anti-Tube to deliver lectures and hold discussions with the research groups. The Ph.D. student will thus get ample opportunities to pursue their research program in a truly stimulating environment. Extracts of the Rules and Regulations governing the Ph.D. or program are given below: Eligibility for Admission R.1 a) A Ph.D. student will be considered by the Senate to be eligible for registration for Ph.D. on applying in the prescribed form provided he/she has obtained M. Tech, of M. C. (for engineering) de free or an equivalent qualification by virtue of an examination. R. 2 a) The degree of Ph.D. may be conferred on a Ph.D. student subject to the following conditions: i) Research work has been carried out under the guidance of supervisor(s) for at least two years in the case of all Ph.D. students after their date of registration. ii) The thesis submitted by the Ph.D. student is required to be recommended for the award of the Ph.D. degree by two external referees (one Indian and one foreigner) and by the Goard of Examines constituted for the viva voice examination. iii) Notwithstanding the provision of R.2(a), a Ph.D. student may be permitted to carry out a part or whole of research work outside the Institute in a factory, laboratory, workshop, worksite, or other research center duly approved for the purpose by the Institute. R.3: The degree of Ph.D. shall not be conferred as an ad-under degree (to one whose actual work was done elsewhere). The student has to spend the minimum stipulated time in the institute for the award of a Ph.D. degree. R.4 Notwithstanding the provisions of R.1, the Senate will consider the registration for the Ph.D. degree of a Ph.D. student who has obtained the B.Tech./M.C./M.A. degree or an equivalent qualification by virtue of an examination in a subject duly approved by the Senate and has successfully completed the minimum prescribed credit requirements under an approved program of studies. R.5 Research Assistants, Reaching Assistants, or any other duly approved category of institute staff may be registered for the Ph.D. degree under the provisions of R.1/Part-Time / Self-Finance, or Sponsored (table). Registration a. In joining the institute, every Ph.D. student is required to plan his or her academic program in consultation with a supervisor of academic knife (department, school, or center) to which the Ph.D. student is admitted. Details of the academic requirements of this program and details of the courses available are given in the bulletin, which will be available in due course. b. The registration for each smelter is carried out through the registration program. His registration is mandatory for all Ph.D. students, and they must register themselves on the prescribed dates announced from time to time. Every Ph.D. student must register in each smelter until he or she completes the program. c. All Ph.D. students have to clear the institute and hostel dues before registration. d. IIT Goa follows a smelter system; hence, registration at the beginning of each smelter is mandatory for every Ph.D. student until completion of the program of study. If a Ph.D. student does not register in a particular school without prior notice per the mission of the Pectoral Committee (hereafter referred to as such), he or she ceases to be a Ph.D. student, and the admission is liable to be canceled. Further, if a Ph.D. student does not register for two consecutive regular semesters, the admission will be canceled by the motor (on its own motion). e. The supervisor is authorized to carry out the course registration and make adjustments as specified later. f. Along with the credit courses, a Ph.D. student, in consultation with the supervisor, is generally allowed to register for a maximum of two audit courses per semester with the consent of the Ph.D. Supervisor and/or the Convened of the concerned Academic Knit. The registration for this is also to be done in consultation with the faculty advisory or supervisor and at the same time as for the credit courses. g. A Ph.D. student is not permitted to register for a course that he or she has undergone and in which he or she has secured higher grades. h. A Ph.D. student who concurrently takes steps toward any postgraduate degree at another organization shall be automatically registered at the institute. i. Registration will be confirmed only after the submission of final year mark sheets or provisional certificates of their qualifying degree by the Ph.D. students. All Ph.D. students should ordinarily submit their certificates within the academic calendar when admitted in the autumn or spring semester of a given academic year, respectively, after joining the institute. ii. The Ph.D. students who are unable to submit their certificate to the Academic Section as prescribed in the Academic Calendar should apply for an extension along with an undertaking stating the due date for submission and giving proper reasons on the prescribed form to be developed for the purpose. iii. Even if a Ph.D. student does not submit the certificate until the commencement of the semester-end examination, he or she would be allowed to appear in the examination. However, the results of such a Ph.D. student shall be withheld until the required documents are produced. iv. Cases of Ph.D. students who do not submit the certificates after the first semester will be reported to the President and the Chairman of the Senate for further consideration and decisions or actions. Course Adjustments Within the period prescribed in the Academic Calendar, an Ph.D. student can substitute one or more courses by others. For this purpose, the Ph.D. student has to carry out course adjustments in consultation with his or her faculty advisory group. 6. Admission R. 6.1: Admission Categories Ph.D. Student Status: The status of the Ph.D. students admitted to the Ph.D. program shall be classified under any one of the following categories: Fulltime Ph.D. student i) Reaching Assistantship (of) ii) Reaching Assistantship through Project (TAP) iii) Not./Semi Not. Fellowship Ward (of QIP, CSIR-JRF, UGC-JRF, DAE, DST-INSPIRE, DBT, NBHM, etc.) iv) Sponsored/Self Finance For more details regarding the above categories, kindly refer to the Ph.D. information brochure on the Institute website. B. Part-time Ph.D. student Teacher External R.6.2: Registration/Temporary Withdrawal from/Leaving the Program a) If an Ph.D. student leaves the program at any time within the first two years without prior permission of the Senate, he or she would forfeit his or her Ph.D. student status. b) If an Ph.D. student withdraws from his or her Ph.D. program at any time without intimation (within the first two years) after admission, his or her Ph.D. student status ceases, and he or she will not be readmitted with any weight for the credits acquired during the period of stay. c) In case a Ph.D. student wishes to withdraw from registration with the prior permission of the supervisor, DPGC, or of, he or she may do so only after a period of two years after the date of confirmation of registration with the prior permission of the chairman, Senate. The application for temporary withdrawal must be endorsed by the Ph.D. Supervisor(s) and the of the institute. Temporary withdrawal could be granted for up to one year (two smelters) initially. Extension n of the duration of withdrawal beyond the period of one year would normally not be encouraged and could be granted by the Senate on recommendation by the of, only under circumstances which the of seems to be genuinely extraordinary. The period of temporary withdrawal will not be counted when counting the number of semesters of Ph.D. registration already completed by the Ph.D. student. 7. Eligibility for Admission R.7.1.: a) Minimum Qualification for Admission (General Eligibility Criteria for D Mission in All Academic Units) For more details regarding the above, kindly refer to the Ph.D. Information Brochure on Institute Mortal (http://iitgoa.ac.in/phdadmission.pp) b) Ward of M.Phil. Degree to the Ph.D. students from the Science and Social Science Stream in Ph.D. who have earned 34 credits through coursework during the Ph.D. program may be permitted to register for the M.Phil. /of (R). Programme. His is permitted in the Departments of Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics, and Humanities and Social Sciences. To obtain an M.Phil. For the R degree, the Ph.D. student must successfully complete one year of project work, leading to the dissertation. c) Ward of M.S. by research for the Ph.D. Ph.D. students from the Engineering Stream A student pursuing the Ph.D. program in an engineering discipline and who has successfully completed the minimum credit requirement of course work may be peri-tied to register for the M.S. program by research leading to a dissertation. The total duration of M.S. Programme will be 2 -3 years. Procedures for the exit option from Ph.D. Program for M.S. By Research 1. One of them decides to recommend discontinuation of the Ph.D. with the option of conversion to M.S. (Research), then the Ph.D. student will be informed accordingly. 2. The Ph.D. student should apply for conversion within a month, along with a work plan and proposal for the completion of the M.S. (Research)/M. Phil degree, through the supervisor. 3. The Ph.D. student applies, and the work plan and timelines are approved by the student, then the Ph.D. is discontinued and converted to an M.S. (Research). 4. If no response is received by the Ph.D. student within a month, it may recommend discontinuation of his or her Ph.D. without the option of conversion to M.S. (Research). Procedures for Valuation of the M.S. Thesis 1. The M.S. By research, these shall be limited to one referee out of two or four referee. 2. In receipt of a favorable report (i.e., `a' or `b') from the referee and comments of the supervisor or internal examiner thereon, permit the Ph.D. student to appear in the viva-voice examination. Only one review by an external examiner shall be considered for the holding of the M.S. by research viva voice. 3. However, if the examiner recommends minor modifications in the thesis (i.e., `c'), the viva voice can be held only after the internal examiner verifies that the changes have been carried out. 4. If the referee recommends major revisions to the thesis (i.e., 'd'), the revised thesis should be submitted within 6 months after incorporating the revisions to the satisfaction of the supervisors and internal examiner. His will will then be sent for further review. 5. If the referee recommends rejection (i.e., `e'), the option of a second referee will be sought. 6. Again, the referee recommends rejection of the thesis; the thesis in its current form is rejected. In such a case, a new thesis may be submitted only once for review, after 1 year and not later than 2 years from the date of notification by the R.7.2: Concurrent registration of any degree at another organization by any Ph.D. student Any Ph.D. student who concurrently registers for any Ph.D. at another organization shall be automatically registered at the institute. 8. Pattern of Courses and Credits The courses offered for the Ph.D. The program may include lecture courses, laboratory courses, design courses, seminars, and courses pertaining to communication skills. R.8.1: Course Credit Structure The credit for a course depends upon the contact hours and self-study hours associated with it and is obtained by adding all these hours. The credits for all the available courses are indicated in the Courses of Study available on the web page of Mean of. There is a provision for Ph.D. students to credit courses from NPTEL or MOOC under special circumstances after approval from the Chairman Senate. R.8.2: Credit Seminar A seminar shall satisfy the following conditions: a) Each seminar shall provide four credits. b) The seminar shall be treated as a course for the purpose of registration and evaluation. c) The seminar coordinator appointed by the Departmental Committee shall arrange the seminar and forward the grades awarded by the panel of exam news to the Academic Office by the end of the semester. d) A Ph.D. student shall not take more than two seminars during the entire Ph.D. Programme. R.8.3 Communication Kills I & of courses (of/of course) a) These courses are compulsory for all Ph.D. st debts. 1. Ph.D. students are normally required to clear the Communication Kills course within the first year. 2. These courses are in addition to the minimum course credit requirement prescribed by the IIT. b) Exemption from doing the Communication Kill course may be given to those Ph.D. students who have completed their qualifying degree program with the Communication Skills course from an IIT. His exemption shall be given only if the Communication Kill course has been completed in the last five years of his or her joining the Ph.D. program. R.8.4: Requirement of number of students in a school to be revised Course credit requirements and registration for courses All Ph.D. students in the Ph.D. program are required to acquire the prescribed credits through course work, which shall normally be completed: a) Within one year from the date of joining by the Ph.D. students having M.Tech./M.C. or equivalent qualified ton. b) Within the first two semesters from the date of joining by the students having B.Tech./M.S./M.A./M.C. equivalent qualification. However, the duration could be extended with permission from the Chairman of the Senate. Ph.D. students will be allowed to complete extra-credit courses if necessary. R.9.1: Applicable to Ph.D. students with M. Tech. or equivalent degree a) The credit requirements for Ph.D. students having M. Tech./M.Phil . or equivalent qualification, will be a minimum of 16 credits, i.e., 2 courses and a seminar, and a maximum of 22 credits. The courses could be taken in any academic unit of the institute (department, school, or center). b) The Ph.D. students may earn up to a maximum of 4 credits through seminary. c) Ph.D. students with an M. Tech. degree who have been admitted to the Ph.D. The program should also undergo at least two courses at the M. Tech./Ph.D. level in addition to the seminar requirements. d) The Ph.D. students may earn a maximum of 6 credits through online NPTEL or MOOC courses R.9.2: Applicable to Ph.D. students with M.C. or M.A. or equivalent degree and admitted to the Ph.D. program in the science discipline. a) The credit requirements for Ph.D. students having an M.C. or M.A.or equivalent qualification admitted to a science department or school shall be 34 to 46 credits, and there will be 16 credits for HSS. The courses could be taken in any academic unit (department, school, etc.) in the institute. b) Credits acquired through level courses shall be 24 or more (minimum 4 courses). c) The Ph.D. students may earn up to a maximum of 8 credits through seminary, which should be spread over two semesters. d) The Ph.D. students may earn credits through online NPTEL or MOOC courses as decided by the DPGC R.9.3.: Applicable to Ph.D. students with B. Tech or equivalent degree and M.C. or equivalent degree admitted to a Ph.D. program in the engineering discipline. a) The credit requirements for Ph.D. students having B. Tech or equivalent qualification, or M.C. degrees or equivalent qualifications admitted to the Ph.D. program in any one of the engineering disciplines shall be 44 to 56 credits. b) The Ph.D. students may earn up to a maximum of 8 credits through seminary, which should be spread over two semesters. c) Credits acquired through level courses should be 3 or more. A minimum of three level-level courses should be completed for credit requirements. R.9.4: Minimum/Maximum Course Credit Registration in a Semester: Full-time Ph.D. Students register through their respective supervisor(s) for not less than 18 credits in the first semester of the course program if the total credits required are 18 or more. Other Ph.D. students with course credit requirements below 18 credits shall register through the supervisor(s) for the entire prescribed credits in the first semester itself. R.9.5.: Extension for Commencement of Coursework Ph.D. students who are unable to commence their course program during the semester in which they have been admitted should apply to OF/DPGC/of and obtain permission to commence their course work in the following semester. R.9.6: The procedure for registration of courses shall be as follows: a) The Ph.D. students, after payment of prescribed registration fees, complete their registration online in consultation with the supervisor(s) and the academic unit. Such registration is required to be approved by his or her supervisor. b) The Ph.D. students, in consultation with the supervisor, can carry out course adjustments within the time limit provided in the academic calendar. c) The institution shall finalize the course program of the Ph.D. students in consultation with the supervisor(s). d) Recommendations, if any, about the reduction of course credits shall be sent to or by the beginning of the semester along with the applications for registration for due approval. e) The Academic Office shall inform the Registrar of any discrepancy. However, the Ph.D. students should ensure on their own that they comply with the credit requirements listed under the rules prescribed above. f) The DPGC shall approve the course program of all Ph.D. students after due scrutiny. R.9.9: Adjustment of Course(s) A Ph.D. student can add to his or her academic load one or more courses not registered for earlier or substitute one or more courses by others by filling out the Course Adjustment Form within the first two weeks from the commencement of classes, provided the course credit requirements as prescribed under R.9.1, R.9.2, and R.9.3 remain unchanged. R.9.10: Dropping of course(s) In Ph.D., a student may drop courses for which he or she may have registered if the academic load for the course is found to be too heavy (Course Dropping Form). Such dropping is permissible until the date as given in the academic calendar, provided the credit requirements laid down in R. 9.1, R. 9.2, and R. 9.3 are not violated. R.9.11: Duration for Dropping of Course(s) The last date for dropping a course by an Ph.D. student will be two weeks after the mid-smelter examination for the smelter-long courses and one week after the mid-smelter examination for the half-smelter courses. The last date for co-use drop-off will be included in the academic calendar. Note: The Ph.D. student shall complete the prescribed Course Adjustment Form (CAF) and Course Dropping Form (CDF) in consultation with the supervisor. R.9.13 Trade Improvement 1. A Ph.D. student is in a Ph.D. A programme where the minimum CPI for coursework is 6.0 will be eligible for repeating or replacing a course for grade improvement if he or she has a CPI less than 6.0 and has been permitted to continue in the Program on Academic Probation. 2. For trade improvement, a Ph.D. student has to register in the course in a subsequent semester if the course is offered. The grade obtained in the registered course will supersede the earlier grade, and the same will be reflected in the Semester Trade C and in the Final Transcript. 3. The Ph.D. student can avail of this option only for two (2) courses in the program and only once for a specific course. 10. Course Assessment and Ward of Trades R.10.1: Trade Joints For every course taken by the Ph.D. student, he or she is assigned a grade based on his or her combined performance in all the assessments. These grades are described by the following letters and corresponding grade points: of (10 points), of (9 points), of (8 points), of (7 points), of (6 p joints), of (5 points), of (4 points), and of (0 points), of (0 points), of (passed, 0 points), of (not passed, 0 points), of (passed, 0 points) of (0 points). The minimum passing grade in a course is ‘of’. Some courses are only associated with one or two grades. In such courses, satisfactory completion is indicated by the award of the grade. The minimum passing grade for all of these courses is However, Ph.D. students should acquire a minimum CPI of 6.00 at the end of each semester. All grades (including no. of, etc.) obtained by a Ph.D. student will be mentioned in the transcription. R.10.2: Failure Trades The letter grades of and of shall be treated as failure grades. The examination may be permitted for a course if the Ph.D. student obtains a grade. After such re-examination, if the Ph.D. student passes in that course, he or she will be awarded the maximum gray de of ‘of’ in that course. If an Ph.D. student does not take or fails the re-examination, he or she will be awarded the grade in the case(s) where, in the opinion of the instructor (panel of examiners in case of the projects), the Ph.D. student has inadequate academic exposure to the course or has very poor performance in the in-smelter and/or end-smelter examinations. A Ph.D. student getting an A has to register for the same course if it is a core subject. If this is an elective course, he or she may register for an alternative course as prescribed, without this being counted as an additional course. For a Ph.D. student who obtains a fail grade in a course more than once, the grade points or credits will be figured only once in the numerator as well as the denomination, respectively, for the purpose of SPI and CPI calculations. R.10.2.1: 'of' grade for academic valor; an active ‘of’ grade may also be awarded for academic malpractices. Details pertaining to academic malpractices are available on the institute website. Academic malpractices are severely dealt with as per the forms of IIT Goa. R.10.3: He-examination in a course A Ph.D. student will be permitted to take the re-examination for a course where he/she has an of grade provided the number of failed backing courses (with an of grade) does not exceed the limit permitted, i.e., at most two during the entire pro. R.10.4: Audit Course The Ph.D. students registered for auditing a course shall be awarded the grade if they fulfill the requirement of a minimum of 80% attendance and duly satisfactory in-smelter performance as prescribed by the instructor. The instructor shall include such grades in the final grade report for that course. If the Ph.D. student does not qualify for the grade, it will be assumed that the course has been dropped by that Ph.D. student, and the student's grade card will be issued accordingly. R.10.5: Additional Learning: Ph.D. students have the option of taking a course as ‘Additional Learning’. These courses will be in addition to the minimum course credit requirement and will not affect the SPI or CPI, but the actual grades obtained will be shown on the grade card and transcribed. There will be the option of changing the type of course. Registration for additional courses will require the approval of the supervisor or DPGC. The option of permitting a Ph.D. student to register for a course as ‘Audit’ is left to the course instructor. R.10.6: I Trade (Incomplete): The grade shall be awarded to an Ph.D. student in a lecture or laboratory course if he or she has satisfactory smelter performance and has fulfilled the attendance requirements of the red firemen but has not appeared for the smelter end examination. The Ph.D. student will be eligible for the semester-end examination if the absence was due to medical reasons or extraordinary circumstances. For re-examination, the Ph.D. student will have to apply to the Academic Office. In cases of absence due to medical reasons, the application should be accompanied by a medical certificate issued or authenticated by IIT Goa Hospital. In cases of absence due to extraordinary circumstances, the SUP-parting documents should be submitted. The Academic Office will decide whether re-examination is to be allowed after consulting with (in cases of medical reasons) and (in cases of extraordinary circumstances). In case a re-examination is allowed and is conducted, the instructor shall decide the final grade on the basis of the sum of the in-smelter and the re-examination marks. The weight of the re-examination would be the same as that of the final examination that the Ph.D. student has missed. In all other cases, the of grade will be converted to the of grade. R.10.7: Seminar Trades For the Ph.D. students who have submitted the seminar report in time, but the evaluation of which, however, could not be completed in time, the Seminar Coordinator shall award the grade I and shall forward the grade report to the Academic Office before the end of the semester. All such I grades shall be converted to letter grades in due course of time, before one month following the end of the smelter. R.10.8: On submission of the seminar report or absence for presentation of a Ph.D. student, whether he or she does not submit his seminar report by the prescribed date or is absent for presentation on the scheduled date, he or she shall be awarded a grade unless he or she is given an extension under exceptional circumstances. R.10.9: Ward of Trades in Remind after obtaining 'of' in earlier presentation. All Ph.D. students who get a grade in seminar shall be allowed to complete the evaluation during the period marked for re-examination and will not be given a grade better than the minimum passing grade. R.10.10: Glass Attendance Rules: A minimum of 80% attendance is mandatory in all the classes. The instructor may decide the attendance rule and announce it at the beginning of the course. It may be a system of giving a percentage weight to Ph.D. student performance evaluations in the course, reserved specifically for attendance and/or class participation. Penalties in attendance and/or class participation should be reflected only in this component of the Ph.D. student performance evaluation. The percentage weight for this 'Glass Participation' component should range from 0 to 20 percent. Signing a zero percent weight for Glass Participation automatically implied that the earlier Ph.D. student would be registered for those courses in which they were absent in any one of the first three lectures. 11. Performance requirements in course work for qualifying to register for Ph.D. degree R.11.1: Required to maintain a minimum CPI of 6.00 at the end of each semester The performance of an Ph.D. student in a smelter is indicated by a number called the Semester Performance Index (SPI). The SPI is the weighted average of the grade points obtained in all the courses taken by the Ph.D. student during the semester. Camp le: Suppose in a given semester, an Ph.D. student has taken five courses with credits of Of, Of, Of, Of, and his/her grade points in those courses are Of, Of, Of, Of, respectively. When his/her 𝑆𝑃𝐼=𝐶𝐼𝐺𝐼+𝐶2𝐺2+𝐶3𝐺3+𝐶4𝐺4+𝐶5𝐺5 Of+Of+Of+Of+Of SPI will be calre-examinationre -examination, if any) on the basis of the final grades awarded of, of, oof, of, of, of,of, of and of. The SPI is calculated up to two denial points. An up-to-date assessment from the time the Ph.D. student entered the institute is obtained by calculating a number called the Cumulative Performance Index (CPI). The CPI is the weighted average of the grade points obtained in all the courses taken by the Ph.D. student since he or she entered the anti-tube. It is calculated in the same manner as the SPI. R.11.2: For Ph.D. students with a credit requirement of 16 to 22 credits, i) In the first semester, if an Ph.D. student fails in only one course and obtains the grade, he or she can avail of a re-exam in that course at the end of the first semester. However, if he or she obtains more than one grade or an A, he or she is not entitled to a re-examination. ii) The credit requirement as prescribed by the DPGC must normally be completed at the end of the first semester but can be extended beyond the first semester if additional courses have been prescribed. R.11.3: For Ph.D. students with a credit requirement of more than 22 credits, i) A Ph.D. student must not obtain a failure grade (of) for more than one course in his or her entire course program; otherwise, he or she has to quit the program. ii) In a smelter, if an Ph.D. student fails in only one course and obtains the grade of, and if he/she has not obtained a failure grade (of or of) in the first smelter, then he/she can avail of a re-examination in that course at the end of that smelter. However, if a Ph.D. student obtains more than one failure grade, he or she is not entitled to a re-examination, and he or she has to quit the program. iii) In a given smelter, if an Ph.D. student fails in only one course and obtains the grade of (after a re-examination, if any), and if he/she has not obtained a failure grade (of or of) in an earlier smelter, he/she will register either for the same course or for an alternative course in the next smelter, as prescribed by the DPGC. iv) The credit requirement as prescribed by the DPGC must normally be completed by the end of the second smelter. R.11.4: Oh. D. Students who obtain grades as enumerated in R.11.2 and R.11.3 are liable to discontinue their Ph.D. program. The DPGC will take a decision in this regard after reviewing the cases of such Ph.D. students. R. 11.5: Compulsory requirement for confirmation of Ph.D. Registration: Some academic units (departments or schools) prescribe qualifying examinations for the Ph.D. program. These must be completed successfully prior to confirmation of registration. A Ph.D. student has to qualify for the comprehensive and obtain a letter grade. R.11.6: Confirmation of Registration Ph.D. students who successfully complete their course credit requirements in one or two smelters shall be granted registration from the beginning of the smelter in which they complete the course credit requirements or from the date of joining the program, whichever is later. R.11.7: Additional courses after the confirmation of registration: All Ph.D. students may be allowed to register for extra credit courses after confirmation of registration by following the present rules for confirmation of registration, i.e. SPI/CPI ago at 6.00, etc. a) The present procedure for confirmation of registration will continue. b) Extension of registration beyond the duration as specified in the rules will not be considered due to registration for extra credit courses. R.11.8: Confirmation of Ph.D. Late registration dates for all Ph.D. students shall be decided by the The final approval of the registration shall be granted by the Senate. R.11.9: Confirmation Procedure The procedure for confirmation of registration shall be as follows: i. Each Ph.D. student, on completion of the course requirements and qualifying examination prescribed by the institution, shall apply for confirmation of registration. ii. The completed application form shall be forwarded to the person who will consider the application and confirm the date of registration according to the rules, as applicable. R.11.10: Academic Probation to the Ph.D. students having marginally lower SPI/CPI than the minimum required for continuation of their studies for Ph.D. students who are identified as ineligible for continuation of the Ph.D. In the program, the following opportunity is available: a) We will directly offer academic probation to the Ph.D. students who are found eligible as per the forms defined by us without waiting for an appeal from the Ph.D. student. However, the necessary declarations from the Ph.D. students would still be taken as per requirements in a reasonable time after the grant of probation. b) In some cases, wherein Fro Nation does not offer Fro Nation to a Ph.D. student, an appeal can be made for probation to DPGC by the Ph.D. students, which could be considered on a case-by-case basis on its merit. c) Academic probation will be a one-time exercise during the study program of the Ph.D. students for the period of one semester and decided by or in consultation with the faculty adviser or supervisor. d) For the Academic Probation Semester, the Ph.D. students must obtain such SPI as to make his or her course work CPI greater than or equal to 6.0 immediately (excluding the dissertation or project work) on including the performance of the smelter of Academic Probation. e) Financial support during the period of academic probation in Ph.D. Programme i. The Ph.D. students who are under academic probation may continue to be paid reaching assistantships at the rate applicable to them. ii. However, no reaching assistantship duties should be given to them on account of the need for them to concentrate on their academic performance and improve it. iii. Therefore, these Ph.D. students would be expected to pay on-concessional terms applicable to their academic program. 7. Supervisor/To-Supervisor R.12.1: Election of Research Topics, Areas of Research In each Department, School, or Centre, applicants will be given, at the time of selecting the details of various research topics and areas proposed by various faculty members for the Ph.D. program, so that they will have an opportunity to discuss those topic areas with the respective faculty members and thereafter submit the supervisor selection form. The applicant shall then be interviewed by a committee constituted by the of R.12.2: Assignment of Research Supervisor The research program and the specific research of a selected Ph.D. student shall be coordinated by his or her supervisor(s) after mutual discussion. All research scholars should be finally assigned to a research supervisor at the time of confirmation of registration. R.12.3: Change of R search supervisor a) Change of supervisor(s) under exceptional circumstances shall be permitted on recommendation of the DPGC after obtaining the consent of (i) the Ph.D. student, (ii) the present supervisor(s), and (iii) the proposed supervisor(s). b) If the research program and/or area of the work require modification due to this change, the Ph.D. student’s entire course program requirement shall be examined by the If there is a change in the research program and/or area of the work, the registration date may be revised if found necessary. R.12.4: Arrangement of Temporary Research Supervisor when the Pain Supervisor is on Leave a) Whenever a Supervisor leaves the Institute permanently or temporarily for a period greater than or equal to six months, he or she shall provide new supervisor(s) for the Ph.D. students being supervised by him or her before his or her departure. The of may consider the continuation of the original supervisor on his or her return to the institute as the supervisor of his or her Ph.D. students, depending on the period for which he or she has supervised the Ph.D. Program of the Ph.D. Students concerned: b) Whenever a supervisor leaves the institute temporarily for a period less than one year, the supervisor will assign a co-supervisor or an administrative supervisor. He of shall make an arrangement for the guidance of his or her OH.D. students with permission of the of c) Any such arrangement made shall be forwarded to the of, DPGC, or supervisor for prior approval, and the decision shall be communicated to the concerned Ph.D. student. R.12.5: Number of Ph.D. students assigned to the Up ervisor: At any given time, the number of Institute Ph.D. students (of, part-time, or sponsored) working with a supervisor shall not exceed 02 (two) in each category. However, he or she can decide on the total number of Ph.D. students of all categories working with him or her. R.12.6: Pectoral Committee (of): After the completion of the specified course requirements by a candidate, the supervisor will constitute a Research Progress Committee (RPC) for all candidates in consultation with the supervisor and DPGC. The committee will normally consist of the supervisor and to-supervisor, a chairman of the committee from the department (if any), one other faculty member conversant with the field of research from the department, and an external member from another department. The names of the members and any subsequent changes in their composition shall be communicated to the Mean for record. Normally, one of the RPC members is expected to function as the internal examiner for the evaluation of the thesis. It is expected to monitor the progress of the candidate until the completion of the program. 13. Place of work, Progress, and Duration In the recommendation of the supervisor(s), the institute may allow the research work for the Ph.D. degree to be partially or wholly carried out at another organization with the following provisions: 13.1: External Organization where an Ph.D. student can carry out the research a) The external organization where an Ph.D. student wishes to carry out the research work partially or wholly shall have to be recognized by the institute before such work is undertaken with approval from the Chairman Senate. b) An external organization may be granted recognition by the organization as an approved place of work. i) The rico nation shall normally be given only for the purpose of the individual research project by a particular Ph.D. student. ii) The details of research facilities available at the organization shall be furnished by the Ph.D. student along with the application for admission to the Ph.D. program. iii) The of shall examine the details given and may decide either to ask for further information or even collect first-hand information, if necessary, by requesting that faculty member(s) visit the organization. Only when the of is fully convinced about the adequateness of the research facilities and the credentials of the external supervisor shall it recommend the case to the of. R.13.2: Annual Progress Seminar (APS) (i) All Ph.D. students are required to submit a report (APR—Annual Progress Report) and present a seminar (APS—Annual Progress Seminar) every year to the research progress committee (RPC) in consultation with supervisor and co-supervisor (if applicable) till successful completion of pre-sycosis. Individual academic units may consider the last date of APR submission prior to the last date of APS presentation. Following are the schedules for the APS presentation. For students joining in the autumn semester: not later than July 30. For students joining the spring semester, they must fail in December, failing which they will not be allowed to register. Students who have completed six years are required to present a progress seminar annually until the successful completion of the pre-sycosis. To suit the specific requirements of a funding agency, students may apply to the convened for a different but fixed schedule (for every year) for the APS presentation. R.13.3: Requirement for Continuation in the Programme/C Scholarship: a) All Ph.D. students registered for Ph.D., irrespective of their category, shall have to register every smelter along with a brief report on the work done in the earlier smelter(s) and a plan for the ensuing smelter; b) All candidates, after joining, shall submit, through the supervisor(s), an APS of their work in the previous academic year to the concerned once a year, in July or January, depending upon the time of admission. For all categories of Ph.D. students, this seminar must be given in July or December of each year, except for the following: in the case of CSIR/UGC/INSPIRE/DBT or similar fellows, the dates of their APS should be fixed by considering the requirements of the funding agency, and such a fixed schedule shall be followed strictly. Regular research scholars are liable to lose their final coal support if the seminar is delayed beyond the said dates. Such seminars are required to be given every year until the thesis is submitted. It is also required for the enhancement of the assistantship and for confirmation or continuation of the air program. The following guidelines are being followed to avoid delays in the presentation of the Annual Progress Seminar: 1. Every Ph.D. student must present the Annual Progress Seminar as per the prescribed schedule every year after the SOTA. 2. If, for some valid reasons, he or she is not able to present the Annual Progress Seminar on time, an application for an extension must be made at least 15 days before the due date of the presentation. 3. Extension will be granted by the Mean on case-to-case basis from September or February, as the case may be, until the date of presentation of the APS. 4. The report of the annual progress seminar in the prescribed format should reach the academic office within four days after the presentation. 5. Delay beyond July or December (as applicable) may lead to the discontinuation or cancellation of the teaching assistantship and/or registration. 6. The assistantship for the period beyond the due date of renewal or enhancement of the assistantship will be released only after receipt of the SAT factory report. The continued registration of all Ph.D. students is subject to satisfactory progress made by them. The above rules are also applicable to CSIR/UGC/INSPIRE/DBT or similar fellows; the date of their APS will be fixed by considering the requirements of funding agencies, and such a fixed schedule will be followed strictly. R.13.4: Minimum Period of Research for Submission of Thesis from the Date of Confirmation: All Ph.D. students (except external Ph.D. students) have to carry out research in the Institute for at least a period of two calendar years from the date of registration after completion of the Qualified before submission of the thesis. External Ph.D. students have to carry out research for at least a period of three calendar years from the date of registration before submission of the thesis (after completion of the qualified/comprehensive exam). R.13.5: Period of Validity of Registration of the Ph.D. Program For all categories of Ph.D. students, the period of validity of their Ph.D. registration is six years from the date of registration. The Ph.D. students may submit their thesis before the end of this period, subject to the provisions of R. 13.4. R.13.5 a): Registration of a Ph.D. program beyond the given year of Ph.D. Ph.D. students who have been registered for five or more years in the Ph.D. program are required to submit a properly completed application on the approval form for extension of the Ph.D. registration to the subsequent year in the Ph.D. program. His application must be completed and submitted on or before the last date for completing the Annual Progress Examination for the year prior to the year for which extension of Ph.D. registration is required. R.13.6: Procedure to be adopted by Ph.D. students for research work involving human participation Ph.D. students whose research work involves human participation (either directly or indirectly) should obtain IIT Goa Institute Ethics Committee (IEC) approval prior to the start of the study or the component of the study involving human participation. IEC approval is mandatory for all such projects. In fact, this is mandated by several funding agencies, e.g. DST, DBT, CSIR, and ICMR IEC approval is also a prerequisite for such research to be published in peer-reviewed journals of repute. IEC approval cannot be taken retrospectively. R. 14 Synopsis and Thesis Submission and Valuation R.14.1: Are-sycosis Seminar and Examination The of will assess the work in consultation with the supervisor(s). The panel must consist of at least two faculty members other than the supervisor(s). These will include RPC members. a) His panel will assess the work through a pre-sycosis seminar and report. The Ph.D. student can submit the thesis only if the panel is satisfied with the quality and quantity of the work for submission as a Ph.D. thesis. b) Details of the pre-sycosis seminar will be notified so as to enable interested staff members and Ph.D. students to attend. c) The Convened of the of will forward the panel reports to the Academic Office through DPGC in the format prescribed for Are-Synopsis Examinations. A list of publications or conferences arising out of the thesis or other outcome, if any, is to be submitted along with the Are-Sycosis report. d) Ph.D. students should submit their sycosis and thesis within three months of the sycosis seminar date. If the sycosis and thesis are not submitted in the specified period, the Ph.D. student will be asked to present the pre-sycosis seminar. R. 14.2: Submission of Synopsis and Thesis R.14.2.1: Format of Sycosis and Thesis The Sycosis and Thesis should be written in the approved format. R.14.2.2: Submission of no. of copies of sycosis and thesis Two copies of sycosis should be submitted to the academic office, along with 4/5 copies of thesis, along with the prescribed forms for submission and certificates from the Accounts Section and the hostel that there are no dues against the Ph.D. student. After approval, the Sycosis will be forwarded to the Academic Office along with the forms and the required certificates. R.14.2.4 Latent is being filed. At the time of the synopsis or thesis submission, the supervisor should select one of the following options for the evaluation of the thesis (included in the form for submission of the synopsis and thesis): 1) The thesis evaluation will be processed immediately. 2) The processing of the thesis evaluation shall be taken up after a communication from the supervisor or six (06) months (whichever is earlier), as a patent is being filed and there is a need to maintain the confidentiality of proprietary information. 3) The thesis will be sent for evaluation after the on-disclosure agreement has been signed by the examiner, and there is a need to maintain the confidentiality of proprietary information. The Ph.D. student has been informed that obtaining an NDA from prospective examiners may delay the thesis evaluation. R.14.2.5: Required Certificates for Submission of Synopsis and Thesis (included in the Form for Submission of Sycosis and Thesis) a) Certificate from the fact that the pre-sycosis seminar examination has been satisfactorily completed. b) A certificate from the Ph.D. student and research supervisor(s) confirming (i) that there is a prima facie case for consideration of the thesis and (ii) that the thesis does not contain any work that has been previously submitted for the award of any degree except to the extent of collaboration, if any, which may then be specified. c) A certificate of authorization from the research supervisor(s) for submission of the thesis. d) Certificate from the Deputy Registrar (Academic) that the press bed course credits are completed. R.14.3: Panel of Referees (External Examines) for Valuation of Ph.D. Thesis R.14.3.1: The supervisor, in consultation with the committee, will recommend to the chairman, Senate, a panel of external examiners (a referee for thesis evaluation), the chairperson (2 names), and the internal examiner for the Ph.D. Viva: One (2 names) of the examinees (referees for thesis evaluation) who are currently evaluating another thesis from IIT Goa should not normally be included in the panel. The thesis supervisor will opt for one of the following schemes (Scheme A or Scheme B) for submitting a portfolio of external examiners. Scheme A: The supervisor will give at least 8 names of external examiners (with at least 4 names from within India) for review of Ph.D. Thesis . The academic office will request that the external examiners review the thesis, and after receiving acceptance, the thesis will be sent to the examiners by the academic office. • The thesis will be sent to only 3 examinees out of the 8. Scheme B: The supervisor(s) of the Ph.D. student will write to potential examiners (approved by them) asking them about their willingness to examine the thesis if requested by the institute. The draft text for such communication will be available on the academic website. After obtaining the willingness of the examinees, four names of such examinees (with at least two names from within India) will be recommended by the supervisor(s). The approved list will then be sent to the academic office. • The thesis will be sent to only 3 examinees out of the 4. R.14.3.2: Election of Examines for Evaluation of Thesis: A) From the panel of external examines duly approved by the of, the Chairman, Senate, or his nominee will choose 3 names. Additional examines will be contracted if the need arises. B) The referees independently send the thesis evaluation report to the academic office, including the following: i) a critical survey and evaluation of the quality and quantity of the work as embodied in the thesis. ii) Questions, if any, to be asked or points to be calculated at the viva-voice examination; and iii) A definite recommendation as to whether the thesis is acceptable for the award of the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. C) If a referee in his or her report is not in a position to make a definite recommendation for the award of the degree, he is requested to assist the Chairman of the Senate in deciding whether the Ph.D. student is required to: • take substantial revisions involving the writing of one or more chapters without, however, doing any further research work. • Completely write the thesis if the thesis, though not acceptable in the present form, reveals sufficient quality and quantity of work to warrant the Ph.D. student being given an opportunity for further research work and/or interpretation of results. D) The internal examiner of the Ph.D. thesis will be a faculty member of the institute who is a member of the concerned Ph.D. student. R.14.4: Referee Valuation Reports on Ph.D. Thesis i. Of all the referees who recommend acceptance of the thesis as it is (i.e., ‘a’), or with clarification of minor points at the time of the viva voice (i.e., ‘b’), the defense can be held directly. ii. Of the 2 out of 3 referees who recommend minor modifications in the thesis (i.e., ‘c’), the defense can be held only after the internal examiner verifies that the changes have been carried out. iii. Of 2 out of 3 referees who recommend major revisions in the thesis (i.e., ‘d’), the revised thesis should be submitted within 6 months after incorporating the revisions to the satisfaction of the supervisors and internal examiner. His will will then be sent for further review. iv. If one referee recommends rejection (i.e., ‘e’), the opinion of a third examiner will be sought. v. Of all the three referees who recommend rejection of the thesis, the thesis in its current form is rejected. In such a case, a new thesis may be submitted only once for review, after 1 year and no later than 2 years from the date of notification by the author, after presenting a pre-sycosis seminar. Note: The copies of the referee reports will be made available to the supervisor/supervisor and the head of the department with an intimation to the Ph.D. student. In the case of (i) above, copies of reports will be sent to the supervisor(s) and faculty to the originator of the department simultaneously with the notification of defense approval. In the cases of (ii) and (iii) above, copies of both reports are to be sent to the supervisor/supervisor for ensuring that all the co-sections, including minor modifications to the thesis suggested by the external referee, have been or will be incorporated. After receiving the response of the supervisor/to- Supervisor, the reports of the referee and the responses of the supervisor/to-supervisor will be sent to ensure that the corrections, including minor modifications and revisions suggested by the external referee, have been or will be incorporated. The Supervisor/To-Supervisor and the of will submit their response within 7 working days from the date of receipt of the reports/supervisors’ response for consideration and approval by DPGC and Chairman, Senate. The Senate shall, however, be the final authority in deciding whether the thesis is accepted for the award of the degree. R.14.5: Approval of holding the defense and Goard of Examines for Defense of will approve the holding of the viva-voice examination (Ph.D. defense) and the Goard of Examines for defense. A Ph.D. student whose thesis has been accepted for the award of the Ph.D. degree will defend his or her work at an open viva-voice examination conducted by a Goard of Examines at the Institute. The Goard of Examines will be appointed by the Chairman, Senate, and it shall consist of: i) Chairman of the viva voice committee; ii) The research supervisor(s) from the department. iii) A faculty member of the institute conversant with the subject to act as the internal examiner; and iv) One of the referees who has reviewed the thesis (failing which, one faculty member from outside the department). a) An external examiner, from among the approved panel of examiners, is required by the Goard of Examines for the Ph.D. viva-voce examination. The chairperson of the Ph.D. viva-voice examination panel will certify the acceptance of the thesis and the successful conduct of the Ph.D. viva-voice examination. b) The Goard of Examines will submit its report in the prescribed form to the Senate. R.14.6: Defense Report a) In satisfactory completion of the viva-voice examination, the degree may be conferred upon the Ph.D. student after approval by the Senate. b) If a thesis has been accepted but the Ph.D. student fails the viva-voice examination, he or she may be permitted by the chairman to reappear for the viva-voice examination again at a later date. The recommendations of the Goard of Examines conducting the viva-voice examination will be considered in taking a decision in this respect. R. 14.7: Submission of Final Copies of Thesis a) After Successful Completion of the Ph.D. Viva-voice examination, the Ph.D. student will submit to the Academic Office the final bound hard copies and soft copies and one copy to the Library of his or her approved thesis, along with the prescribed form, within one month from the date of defense. 15. Reaching Assistantship R.15.1: Late of Assistantship The Institute Ph.D. students will be paid scholarships at a rate in accordance with the directive from the appropriate authorities. R.15.2: Tenure of Assistantship Institute Ph.D. students are eligible to receive an assistantship for a maximum period of five years as communicated by the MHRD. R.15.3: Enhancement of Assistantship a) All Institute research scholars shall apply for enhancement of assistantship two weeks before the completion of two years from the date of joining. They shall submit five-type copies of the summary of their work, described in five to six pages, to the Chairman of b) Subject to satisfactory assessment, the candidates will be eligible for enhanced assistantships after the completion of two years from the date of joining. c) If, in the opinion of the committee, the enhanced assistantship cannot be recommended, the committee may stimulate a period of time, not less than three months, for the candidate to reappear before the committee for consideration of the enhanced assistantship. d) Continuation of Reaching Assistantship until the period of entitlement. The Ph.D. students with Reaching Assistantship, Fellowship, or Financial Support routed through the Institute who submit their thesis before the stipulated period of 5 years may continue to avail of their financial support until the date of their Ph.D. Viva One Examination or the end of the period of their entitlement, whichever is earlier. The means or supervisor of the concerned department or school may recommend such cases by terrifying the needs in consultation with the Ph.D. Supervisor(s). R.15.4: Ward of Reaching Assistance to Ph.D. Students with B. Tech from IITs without GATE requirement: of ship will be awarded to the Ph.D. student admitted with a B. Tech qualifying degree from the IITs without GATE requirements provided the candidates had a CGPA/CPI greater than or equal to 8.00 on a 10-point scale in their B. Tech degree. 16. Leave Rules R.16.1: All Ph.D. students are entitled to leave for a maximum of thirty days per year in addition to public holidays. Also, 10 days of leave for medical reasons is permitted. R.16.2: Women Scholars are entitled to paternity leave at the full rate for a period not exceeding 180 days, once during the tenure of their Ph.D. studentship. It should be supported by a medical certificate. R.16.3: Pale Scholars are entitled to 15 days’ paternity leave once during the tenure of their Ph.D. studentship. It should be supported by a medical certificate. The Mean or Chairman of the Goard is authorized to sanction the above leave. R.16.4: Vacation in the summer or winter is admissible. R.16.5: Special leave to attend seminars or conferences in India or abroad to present research papers, with the permission of the Mean Academic Programme, is admissible. R.16.6: Ph.D. students under CSIR/UGC and other categories are governed by the rules of the bodies that provide financial support.