UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMMES PROCEDURES & REQUIREMENTS 'Vidya Vinayena Deepyate' 'Knowledge shines with humility' INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY GOA UG Manual Indian Institute of Technology Goa IIT Goa is offering Undergraduate Programmes from the year 2016. The broad objectives of the program are: • To provide the highest level of education in the field of technology and science; and to produce competent engineers and scientists with well-honed managerial and entrepreneurial skills,  team spirit, and leadership qualities who can contribute towards the Country and society;  • To promote a spirit of free and objective inquiry and the development of knowledge in different disciplines. • To increase student participation in nation-building through technology development that is sensitive to local needs. Academic programs are governed by rules and regulations approved by the Senate from time to time. The Senate is a statutory and supreme body of the Institute that governs all academic matters of the Institute, and the rulings of the Senate Chairman are final in regard to all academic issues. The Senate continuously monitors the academic programs and makes appropriate modifications and improvements as and when required. The Senate also sets a definite time schedule for various academic activities. This manual sets out the procedures and requirements of the undergraduate programs of study that fall under the purview of the Senate Undergraduate Committee (SUGC), a standing committee of the Senate. This institute-level committee decides the pace and even the continuation of the student, or otherwise, on the basis of their overall performance and academic record. IIT Goa is a very student-oriented place, and it is our endeavor always to ensure that the students of this institute get the best of everything that is needed to create outstanding scientists and engineers. Thank you for choosing IIT Goa. I wish all students a very bright future and a successful career. Date: June, 2019 Dean of Academic Programmes Introduction Committees and units of the institute that are directly concerned with the undergraduate programs are: Programme Undergraduate Committee (P UGC): Each academic department constitutes this committee, which consists of a convener nominated by the department (in consultation with the faculty of the department), a faculty coordinator of the program who will be the chairman of PUGC, and two student representatives. The student representatives are nominated by the undergraduate students of the department for a one-year period. The tenure of faculty members is for two years, with half of them retiring each year (or as decided by the department). The PUGC: • advises the students about their curriculum and academic opportunities; • monitors the progress of academically weak students; • handles any problems faced by students in their academic programs. Senate Undergraduate Committee (SUGC): This is a standing committee formed by the Senate to look after all the issues regarding institute UG programs. It makes recommendations to the Senate on all academic issues, including policy matters and specific problem instances related to UG students and UG programs. Its constituents are the conveners of various PUGCs (Program Under Graduate Conveners) where applicable, the last SUGC chairperson (ex-officio), one Senate nominee, and four student representatives nominated by the Student DY. The chairperson is elected by the constituent members. Outline of the UG Programme B. Tech program consists of courses in Sciences, Humanities and Social Sciences, Engineering and Technology, and other related topics. The sequence of studies broadly consists of four stages. The first stage is an introduction to the sciences, humanities, and technical arts (such as workshops, etc.). This is common for all UG programs. The second stage is the study of engineering courses that emphasize broad-based knowledge in interdisciplinary areas, which enables the students to appreciate the links between science, engineering, and the humanities. In the third stage, the students are exposed to subjects in the chosen areas of study that dwell on the principles governing design and develop in them the ability for physical and analytical modeling, design, and development. During the final stage, an engineering student studies problems of integrated design with an awareness of size, performance, optimization, and cost and works independently on a B.Tech. Project. Students are thus initiated into the methods of research, library reference work, use of engineering scientific equipment and instruments, learning of modern computational techniques, and writing of technical and scientific reports. In parallel with the last two stages, the student is introduced to the social and economic objectives of the era and to the interaction between man, machine, and nature. This is sought to be achieved through elective courses (to be offered in the coming semesters) in humanities and social sciences and through practical training, fieldwork, work visits, and seminars. In addition, students are also made aware of environmental issues through an introductory course in environmental science and engineering. The requirements for the degree program run by the institute are broadly classified as: (a) institute requirements (further divided into C-level courses, elective courses, and other quirements). (b) Departmental Requirements (further divided into compulsory courses, elective courses, and other requirements, projects, internships, and seminars) Academic Session 1.1 Semester The Institute follows a specialized credit-based semester system. The academic session normally runs from the end of July in one year to the middle of July in the next year. It is divided into three parts: Semester I: From the fourth week of July to the last week of November. Semester II: From the first week of January to the first week of May Summer Term (not a regular semester): From the middle of May to the middle of July. Semester I begins in July and is known as the Autumn Semester, and the semester that begins in January is known as the Spring Semester. During the summer vacation, there is one additional term for summer courses known as the Summer Semester (not a regular semester). The Institute runs summer courses, self-study courses, etc. (subject to availability and consent of the faculty member(s)) to provide an opportunity to clear backlog courses, if any. 1.2 Duration Each of the two regular semesters consists of about sixteen weeks, including one week of mid-semester recess. About nine working days of each semester are used for the end-of-semester examination, and a one-week period during the semester is used for the mid-semester examination. The equivalent of fourteen weeks is devoted to teaching, which excludes all holidays and days spent on both examinations in each semester. The summer term consists of eight teaching weeks, not including holidays and examination days. 1.3 Academic Calendar The dates of all academic activities, including those of registration, late registration, last date of document submission, first and last days of classes, add-drop of courses, examinations, make-up examination, deadline for final grade submission, and vacation, are published in the Academic Calendar every year by the office of the Dean (AP). The academic calendar is also available on the web page of the institute. 2. Curriculum/Program of Study 2.1 Curriculum Every department has a prescribed course structure, which in general terms is known as the curriculum or course of UDY. It prescribes courses to be studied each semester. The courses of study are updated every semester and are available on the institute's website. 2.2 Course Credit System/Structure: To be copied from the minutes of Curriculum Committee 3. Registration 3.1 Semester-wise registration Registration is done at the beginning of each semester on the prescribed dates announced from time to time and is mandatory for every student until s/he completes their academic program. On joining the institute at the beginning of each academic year, each student is assigned to a faculty adviser (F.A.). The student can register for courses they intend to take during a given semester or summer term only on the basis of the program for each discipline as given in the Courses of Study and as per the advice given by their faculty member. The faculty adviser is expected to discuss with the student their academic performance during the previous semester and decide the number and nature of the courses for which they can register during the semester within the framework of the guidelines given by the SUGC. The faculty adviser is also authorized to persuade the student to drop one or more courses based on their academic performance after the first semester or year and the corresponding categorization. In fact, the faculty adviser may prepare a revised plan of study at a slower pace for students with poor performance. 3.1.1 Procedure for Registration The institute has an offline/online registration system, and registration is normally done on the first two days of each semester and the summer term. The registration schedule is announced in advance (Academic Calendar). Students should contact their respective faculty advisers for consultation and registration; this involves the selection of courses consistent with the specific credit requirements detailed in the courses of study and subject to the students’ performance in the previous semester. The academic registration process gets completed only after the PUGC convener or faculty advisor approves the registration form. A registration is considered valid only if there is no time-table conflict between the courses for which the student has registered. (Current and Backlogs) Unless this procedure is completed, registration will be considered invalid. In any case, registration must be completed on or before the prescribed last date for registration. Students with outstanding dues to the institute or HOStel shall not be permitted to register. Late registration may be permitted only for valid reasons and on payment of a late registration fee as prescribed from time to time. However, if a student fails to register during any semester, their registration is liable to be cancelled. Students having backlog courses are required to register by filling out a Course Registration Form (CRF), which will be made available to them by the Academic Section. The CRF will contain all the compulsory courses for the semester pre-printed. The student should duly complete the CRF, get it approved by the faculty adviser, and then submit the same to the Academic Section for further necessary action. The faculty advisor may recommend a reduced load for students with backlogs after considering the regulations as decided by the SUGC. 3.1.2 Registration for the first two semesters In each of the first two semesters of the program, a student is required to register for all the courses listed in the curriculum for the semester. In addition, students who are identified as academically weak at the end of the first semester may be prescribed a specially worked-out load in consultation with the faculty advisor. These students are required to do manual registration. Registration of a student in a course may be cancelled at any stage by the Academic Section if it is found that they do not meet the pre-requisites of the course, if there is a clash in the student's timetable preventing her or him from attending the course, or if it is found that she or he is not eligible to register for that course for any other reason. An instructor of a course may also recommend the cancellation of registration for any student in that course for reasons such as absence from classes without proper authorization. The instructor may recommend de-registering such students up to four weeks prior to the last day of classes. The instructor should send de-registration recommendations to the SUGC Chairperson. The same information should also be sent to the concerned PUGC. The SUGC Chairperson's decision in each case shall be conveyed to the instructor and the student at least two weeks prior to the last day of classes. 3.1.3 Registration for third and subsequent semesters As has already been mentioned, students must regularly register for every semester from its commencement until the completion of their program. From the third semester onwards, a student is normally required to register for a minimum of credits as recommended by PUGC every semester after taking into account the grades of the re-examination, if any. Each course carries a weight in terms of credits indicating the approximate number of contact hours (lectures and tutorials and/or laboratory hours) as well as self-study hours per week required for the course. The Cr edit calculation for a course is done by the following formula: C=3L+2T+P+A, where C is the number of credits, L is the number of lecture hours, T is the number of tutorial hours, P is the number of laboratory hours, and A is the additional number of hours needed for assignments and projects, as decided at the time of approval of the course. The normal academic load is up to 36 credits per semester. Students may register for up to 30 percent less or 30 percent more credits than the normal load. For discussion and replacement, see Exceptions to Regular Rules regarding Academic Load (a) Underload: Students who are identified as academically deficient (on academic probation) may register for a minimum of 10 credits as advised by the faculty advisor or PUGC. (b) Overload: In special cases, students can register for courses beyond the graduation requirement as advised by the faculty advisor or PUGC. Withdrawal on medical grounds or for other exceptional reasons may be permitted by SUGC up to a maximum of two semesters during the students' entire program. If a student does not register for a regular semester (Autumn or Spring) without prior permission from SUGC, they will be deregistered from the program and may not be normally readmitted. 3.2 1 Registration for Summer Term Students can register for a maximum of 4 courses during the summer program on payment of registration fees at the prescribed rate. The course will run during the summer, provided a minimum of five students register and a faculty member is available to offer the course. The course instructor will monitor the attendance of the students registered, and he may award a “DX” grade as per rule for poor attendance. Normal grading may be followed for the summer courses. 3.3 Course Adjustment (Adding and Dropping of a Course) Within the first two weeks of the commencement of a semester, a student is permitted to make adjustments in his academic load by the addition or deletion of one or more courses, provided the total credits normally prescribed in the curriculum are not affected (overload or underload) by such adjustments. If in the third or any of the subsequent semesters the students find their academic load too heavy, they may drop one or two courses out of the registered ones, provided the minimum credit requirement is met. This has to be done in consultation with the faculty adviser or PUGC convener within two weeks of the commencement of the semester. The students, however, will not be permitted to drop backlog courses for which they have registered. Courses dropped by a student may be taken during the summer term (if offered) or during a subsequent semester. When the need for course adjustment through addition, substitution, or dropping of courses arises, the student should do it manually by filling out a Course Adjustment Form (CAF). Each add/drop request needs to be accepted by the concerned course instructor. This should be done in consultation with and with the approval of the faculty adviser or PUGC convener. Each copy has to be signed by both the student and the faculty adviser. In all cases, course adjustments or droppings must be done before the last date for course add and drop, as announced by the institute in its academic calendar. The student must submit the CAF to the academic office within the prescribed time. In cases where the students are facing academic problems and in exceptional cases, SUGC may allow them to drop courses (subject to maintaining the minimum course credit requirements) even after the last date for dropping the courses if a special recommendation is made by the faculty adviser and the PUGC to the Chairperson, SUGC. Adding courses is not permitted in the summer term. However, students may drop a course up to two weeks prior to the last day of classes for the summer course. 3.4 National Sports Organization (NSO) Students must register for any one of these activities during the first two semesters as a mandatory requirement. NSO is a compulsory requirement for the first two semesters. The choice will be made on the basis of the aptitude of the student for any of these activities and will be decided by a committee constituted for the purpose. Formal registration must be done for any one of these activities only at the beginning of the first two semesters, along with other courses. Once registered for one of these activities, no change will be permitted at a later stage. This requirement must be completed before the end of the second year. In cases where valid reasons exist, a student may be given special permission to complete this requirement before the end of the third year, failing which they will not be permitted to register for the courses of the fourth year. A student will be awarded a PP (pass) grade for this activity in each semester provided the minimum requirement of this activity is met during that semester, along with an 80% minimum attendance requirement, failing which the grade NP (not pass) will be given. The award of the degree is subject to the successful completion of NSO. In addition to the above mandatory requirements, students are also permitted to take NSO in subsequent years. This facility is specially meant for students interested in NSO activities. 3.5. Courses in the unscheduled semester In case the number of repeaters or backlogged students in a course is five or more, the Faculty Coordinator of the concerned program may consider offering such a course an additional time, although it may not be slated to run during that semester, subject to timetable constraints and the availability or willingness of a faculty member. Such a proposal should come from the PUGC and be approved by the Dean (AP). The rules that govern overload will be strictly observed when letting students register for such courses. 3.6 Grant of Leave/Semester Drop on Medical Ground 3.6.1: Mid-Semester Recess and Vacation: Undergraduate students are entitled to avail themselves of the mid-semester recess, winter, and summer vacations as specified in the Academic Calendar without seeking any permission. 3.6.2: Short Leave: Leaves of absence during the semester are discouraged for all registered students. However, for bona fide reasons, a student may apply for leave. The extent of this leave for medical reasons can be a maximum of ten working days per semester. A maximum of five working days of leave may also be granted for any other valid reason. In no case may a student be granted leave of absence in excess of fifteen working days in a semester. The leave of absence in the summer term shall correspondingly be five working days (medical) and three working days (others), i.e., eight working days total. An application for leave of absence may be submitted to the academic office through the faculty coordinator. 3.6.3: Temporary Withdrawal or Semester Leave: A student may be allowed a leave of absence for a whole semester (temporary withdrawal) for bona fide reasons. Such leave of absence shall ordinarily not exceed two semesters with or without break during the entire period of the academic program. (a) An application for temporary withdrawal should be made before the date of registration for the semester as mentioned in the academic calendar. However, under exceptional circumstances, a student may apply for withdrawal anytime during the semester. (b). Applications for temporary withdrawal should be addressed to the dean and routed through the department coordinator and faculty advisor. It should be submitted to the academic office with supporting documents such as a medical certificate (in original) in case of an illness. (c) A student who remains on authorized leave of absence due to ill health shall be required to submit a certificate from a Registered Medical Practitioner, ratified by the MO, IIT Goa, to the effect that s/he is sufficiently cured and is fit to resume her/his studies. The student's registration shall be provisional until the medical officer certifies its fitness. In the event that the MO recommends that the student is not yet fit to resume studies, the registration may be cancelled. 3.6.4: Penalty for Unsanctioned or Excessive Leave: If a student is found to be absent from class without sanctioned leave, then the course instructor may recommend deregistering the student from the course. The policy regarding unsanctioned leave leading to de-registration or any other consequence must be declared by the instructor at the beginning of the course. This rule applies to courses in regular semesters as well as in the summer term. If a student is found to be absent from a majority of lectures, tutorials, and laboratory sessions for more than 20 working days (not necessarily contiguous) in a semester, with or without sanction, then her or his registration for all the courses in that semester may be cancelled by the Senate on the recommendation of SUGC, resulting in a forced semester drop. If a student is found to be absent from all academic activities in a semester without authorization for more than 30 working days consecutively or s/he does not appear, without a compelling reason, for the end-of-semester examinations in all the courses in which s/he is registered, then her/his program will be terminated. 4. Examination/Assessment 4.1 Attendance Attendance in classes is compulsory and will be monitored. A student not having a minimum of 80 percent attendance (a standard of attendance may be announced by the course instructor before the commencement of the semester) may be debarred from appearing in the semester-end examination and given a DX grade, and such a student has to re-register for the same course. In general, the institute expects 100% attendance, and at least 80% attendance in the course is permitted on medical grounds or other emergency conditions. A medical certificate from the IIT Goa Health Centre or a government hospital (to be endorsed by the MO, IIT Goa) is necessary for getting leave on health or medical grounds. 4.2 Modes of Assessment The various modes of assessment used for rating students' performance in a lecture course include quizzes, class tests (open or closed book), home assignments, seminars, group assignments, viva voce, mid-semester examinations, and the semester-end examination. The distribution of weightage for the assessment through the various modes listed above will normally be as follows: there will be one mid-semester test of two hours’ duration for each course to be held as per the schedule fixed in the Academic Calendar, and during such examination period, there will be no classes held. In addition, two quizzes (or one quiz and one test) and/or assignments, or viva voce, shall make up the rest of the in-semester assignment. The relative weightage would be approximately 30 percent for the mid-semester test, 20 percent for the two quizzes, tests, assignments, viva voce, and active participation in discussions in the classroom. For active participation, the instructor may set aside up to a maximum of 10 percent of the total marks. The relative weightage for the semester-end examination would be 50 percent. However, the instructor has discretionary powers as per the course, and the same will be announced at the beginning of the semester. The end-of-semester examination will cover the full syllabus of the course. The end-of-semester examination is compulsory for all students. The assessment in the laboratory course will be based on turn-to-turn supervision of the student's work, their performance in viva-voce examinations and group discussions, the quality of their work as prescribed through laboratory journals, and an end-of-semester test that contains an experiment or a written exam. For a laboratory course, in-semester work will normally carry 75% and the end-of-semester test 25% weightage, respectively. However, the instructor may change the distribution of marks between in-semester and end-semester evaluations. The instructor will announce the mode of evaluation and distribution of marks at the beginning of the course. It is obligatory to maintain a laboratory journal as prescribed by the course instructor. The final examination for laboratory courses will normally be held a week before the final theory examination. 4.3 Grading i) For every course taken by a student, they are assigned a grade based on their combined performance over the semester in all the assessments in that course. These grades are described by the letters AP, AA, AB, BB, BC, CC, CD, DD, FF, FR, and DX, each of which not only indicates a qualitative assessment of the student's performanc e but also carries a quantitative (numeric) equivalent called the grade point as given below: Letter Grade Numerical (grade point) Remarks AP 10 Letter Grades and equivalent Numerical Grades AA 10 AB 09 BB 08 BC 07 CC 06 CD 05 DD 04 FF 00 Eligible for one re -exam FR 00 Repeat the course DX -- Fail (Lack of attendance - Repeat the course) II -- Incomplete (on health grounds) DR -- Dropped PP -- Passed NP -- Not Passed AU -- Audit Course A student passes the course if they gets any grade in the range of AP to DD, but fails if they gets the grade FF, FR or DX. The grade DR indicates ‘course dropped'. However, the minimum passing grade in each stage of the dual degree project assessment shall be “CC”. ii). A student is awarded the fail grade FF if their performance in the course is poor. They are eligible for 50% weightage in the re-exam only once, immediately following the end-of-semester. examination as per the timetable announced by the Academic Section. If absent for such a re-examination for any reason, the student will be awarded an “FR” grade. A student with an FR grade is not eligible for re-examination in that course and has to re-register for that course whenever it is offered. The maximum grade offered for a re-exam is DD. iii). A FR grade will be awarded in cases where, in the opinion of the instructor, the student hasn't had adequate academic exposure to the course and should therefore repeat the course. A FR grade may also be awarded in cases of minor malpractice in examinations or assessments. A student whose in-semester performance is very poor may be awarded the ‘FR' grade by the instructors, even if they missed the end-of-semester examination for any reason. v). The grade DX in a course is awarded if a student does not maintain at least 80% attendance in the lecture or tutorial classes. The DX grade may also be awarded to students with bad or incomplete semester records for non-medical reasons. The DX grade will be declared in the first week of November for the Autumn Semester Courses and in the first week of April for the Spring Semester Courses (in general, one week before the semester-end exams). A student with a DX grade in a given course is not permitted to take the semester-end examination in that course. Such a student has to re-register for the same course whenever it is offered. vi). In addition to the above grades, there is also an incomplete grade ‘II' which is awarded in a lecture or lab course if a student has satisfactory in-semester performance but has not appeared for the end-semester examination on medical grounds. The student is entitled to 50 marks for the re-examination given at the end of the particular semester. The 'II'II'ade will be converted into a performance grade (depending on the overall performance in the course) after the re-examination. To be discussed with Prof. Biswas: 4.4 Re-examination due to illness or accident: If the student misses the examination due to personal illness or accident, his application for re-examination must be supported by a proper medical certificate duly approved by the Medical Authority of the Institute. In the event of the death or serious illness of a parent or guardian, the application should be supported by adequate evidence of the same routed through the faculty advisor or PUGC. The student should submit the medical certificate to the academic office. Any student who fails to apply for re-examination in the prescribed manner will be deemed to have failed in those courses and will be awarded an FR grade. They will be required to repeat those courses. 4.5 No fail policy SPI/CPI 4.5.1 Semester Performance Index (SPI) The performance of a student in a semester is indicated by a number called the Semester Performance Index (SPI. The SPI is the weighted average of the grade points obtained in all the courses registered by the student during the semester. For example, if a student passes five courses (theory, labs, projects, seminars, etc.) in a semester with credits C1, C2, C3, C4, and C5, and her/his grade points in these courses are g1, g2, g3, g4, and g5, respectively, then her/his SPI is equal to: C1g1 + C2 g2 + C3 g3 + C4 g4 + C5 g5 SPI = ――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――   The SPI for any semester will take into consideration the FR grades awarded in that semester. For example, if a student has failed in course 4, the SPI will then be computed as: C1g1 + C2 g2 + C3 g3 + C4 * ZERO + C5 g5 SPI = C1 + C2 + C3 + C4 + C5 The courses that do not meet the minimum requirement of the degrees will not be considered for the calculation of the SPI. Such additional courses undertaken and the grades earned by the student will be shown separately. 4.5.2 Cumulative Performance Index (CPI): An up-to-date assessment of the overall performance of a student from the time s/he entered the institute is obtained by calculating a number called the Cumulative Performance Index (CPI), in a manner similar to the calculation of SPI. The CPI therefore considers all the courses registered by the student towards the minimum requirement of the degree s/he has enrolled in or since s/he entered the institute. The CPI is calculated at the end of every semester to two decimal places and is indicated in semester grade reports. The CPI will reflect the failed status in cases of FR grade(s) until the course(s) are cleared. When the course(s) are cleared by obtaining a pass grade on subsequent registrations, the CPI will only reflect the new grade and not the fail grades earned earlier. Example: Up to semester r, a student has registered for n courses, among which s/he has a “FR” grade in the course i. The semester grade report at the end of the semester will therefore contain a CPI calculated as: C1g1 + C2g2 + C3g3 +... +Ci* ZERO +Cn gn CPI = ――――――――― ―――― ―― C1 + C2 + C3 + ... +Ci +... Even if a student has failed a course more than once, the course will figure only once in the numerator as well as the denominator. At the end of semester r+1, s/he has registered for four more courses, including the backlog course i, and has cleared all the courses, including the backlog course. The CPI at the end of this semester is calculated as C1g1 + C2g2 + C3g3 +... +Ci*gi+..+Cn gn CPI = ――――――――― ―――― C1 + C2 + C3 +... +Ci +... The courses that do not meet the minimum requirements of the degrees will not be considered for the calculation of the basic CPI. These courses will be shown separately, and a separate CPI will be calculated for these courses. There will also be a combined CPI calculated, which considers all the credits earned by the student. At the end of each semester, the grade report, which reflects the performance of the student in that semester, is sent to the faculty advisor of the respective student; a copy to the concerned student and a copy to the parent are also sent to their respective addresses by post and email. 4.5.4 Implications of fail grades on CPI The CPI will reflect all courses done by the student, including those where they have failed. Thus, FR and DX grades will affect the CPI and SPI of the student. In the case of FF and II grades, CPI will be calculated on the basis of the grade obtained by the student on a successful attempt in the re-exam, which will be restricted to DD. 4.6 Fail and Incomplete Grades (Conversion Rule) 4.6.1 ‘II' Grade Only students with a satisfactory and complete in-semester record who miss the end-of-semester exam for reasons set out as acceptable in rule 4.4 should be given an II grade. However, in the event that the student fails to appear for the re-examination on admissible grounds, the student shall be considered to have dropped the course. If the reason for absence at the re-exam is not supported by a medical certificate, the II grade awarded will be revised to FR. Thus, the II grade gets converted to one of the following: (i) ‘DR' (course dropped, as above), (ii) ‘FR' in case of poor performance or unjustified absence, for the re-exam, and (iii) a pass grade depending on the student's performance. The II grade will therefore not be continued beyond the semester-end re-examinations. 4.6.2 ‘D X' Grade An ‘DX' grade is treated as equivalent to ‘FR' for the purpose of CPI calculation, and the following criteria, in addition to poor attendance (less than 80%), may be considered for the award of a DX grade: (i) Badly incomplete in-semester record (due to non-medical reasons) {for example, in the case of a student who has missed all tests and mid-semester, etc.; (ii) Misconduct or use of unfair means in the examination, assignments, etc., of a nature serious enough to invite disciplinary action in the opinion of the instructor. (It is emphasized that awarding the DX grade is in the nature of an immediate action in such cases, and the case may be referred to the SSAC (Senate Students Advisory Committee) for consideration of further punishment depending on the seriousness of the offense.) The names and roll numbers of students to be awarded the DX grade should be communicated to the academic office as per the academic calendar in advance of the end-of-semester examination. 4.6.3 FF and FR grades (i) The in-semester performance of all students should be displayed and sent to the academic office by the instructor before the end-of-semester examination. Those awarded ‘DX' grades as described above will be clearly identified in this list as per the academic calendar. ii). Based on the in-semester performance, the instructor also decides and publishes a cutoff (based on the average performance of the class), above which the in-semester performance is considered'satisfactory'.. (This limit would be similar to the lower limit for the DD grade.) iii) A student with a'satisfactory' in-semester performance should not be given an ‘FR' grade in the overall assessment. Such a student, in the event of overall poor performance (not passing), should be given an ‘FF' grade and a chance at re-examination. The maximum grade obtainable in such a re-examination is limited to DD. It is thus clarified that grades FF and II are placeholders only and do not enter into CPI or SPI calculations directly. These grades get converted to one of the regular AR grades after the semester-end re-examinations. However, FR and DX grades are given for different reasons and have direct consequences for SPI and CPI. 4.6.4 Policies on disclosing the evaluated end-semester answer books, period of retention, and re-evaluation: A course instructor should allow students to see the evaluated answer scripts at their discretion, as long as this is done before finalizing grades. The limit fixed for such a disclosure is three days before the last date for receiving grades in the academic office. Time and venue will be decided and conveyed by the course instructor. There is a provision for requesting a re-total of Rs. 200 per course. Such requests will be processed by the Academic Office. Any change in grade requires the approval of the Chairman of the Senate. Once grades are published, changes, if any, will be allowed in the case of totaling and tabulation errors only. A request for re-totaling must be made by the student to the academic office using the prescribed form, which will be sent to the faculty for further action. Students must not contact faculty directly. Evaluated answer scripts should be preserved by the instructor or departmental office for a minimum period of one semester. 4.7 Re-examination (50% weightage): Students obtaining FF and II grades in a course will have only one chance to clear the course by re-examination. This re-examination will be of 50% weight and will be held immediately following the main examination; another 50% will be from the end-of-semester examination. The grading will be done in the same way as in the end-of-semester examination. The maximum grade obtainable with a re-exam is outlined below: 4.7.1 Re-examination for students who are awarded an “II” grade but have attended a major part of the in-semester assessment and whose performance is good enough to justify a re-examination, or in the case of students getting an ‘II' grade and whose absence from the semester-end examination is on valid grounds, will be permitted to take the re-examination. Re-examinations are held towards the end of the winter vacation for those who missed the first semester (autumn) examination and towards the end of the summer vacation for those who missed the second semester (spring) examination. After re-examination, the student is entitled to an appropriate grade on the basis of their in-semester and re-examination performance. There will be no grade restriction. If the student misses the re-examination due to medical reasons, the II grade will be converted to drop (DR), and if the student misses the re-examination due to non-medical reasons, the II grade will be converted to FR, and the student will have to repeat the course. 4.7.2 Re-examination due to FF: Those students who are awarded the “FF” grade may be permitted to take the re-examination. Re-examinations are held towards the end of the winter vacation for those who failed the first semester (autumn) examination and towards the end of the summer vacation for those who failed the second semester (spring) examination. In such a situation, if the student passes, the maximum grade obtainable shall be limited to DD, and if the student misses or fails, the FF grade shall get converted into FR, and the student will have to repeat the course. 4.8 Treatment of Malpractice or Unfair Means: A FR grade may be awarded to those students found or reported for malpractice or using unfair means in an examination, re-examination, or assessment. In addition to this, the decision of the SSAC in such matters will be final and binding. 5. Special features in registration: 5.1 Carrying backlogs forward: Every student must register for a minimum of credits each semester as prescribed by PUGC. Normally, students should register for the backlog courses at the first available opportunity. However, the faculty adviser may advise the students appropriately to drop the backlog course in favor of the prerequisite course in order to avoid a cascading effect in subsequent semesters. The faculty advisers and PUGCs should exercise special care and assist the students in this regard. 5.2 Audit Course Auditing of courses by undergraduate students during regular semesters and summer term is permitted under the following conditions: i) Students with CPI 7.5 and above will be permitted to ‘Audit' the course. However, this would be restricted to a maximum of two courses during the entire period of the program. ii) The students have to enter the courses to be audited in the Course Registration Form while registering for the semester. The course will not carry any credits. The word “audit” would be specially mentioned in the remarks column of the student's course registration form. Prior permission from the instructor is required. iii) The students would be required to have a minimum of 80% attendance in the audit course. iv) The ‘AU' grade would be awarded by the instructor if the attendance is satisfactory and the requirements set out by the instructor are met. Students will be expected to complete the in-semester assessments. If the attendance and performance are not satisfactory, the course will not appear at all on the grade card. v) Students can audit a course, provided the course is offered and the timetable slot permits. vi) The course done by auditing will not be considered for the purposes of the calculation of SPI or CPI but will be reflected in the semester grade report as an audit course. 5.3 Guided Study The capable students will be provided the option of guided study to acquire proficiency in an area of their choice through doing courses outside their curriculum in a self-study-like mode. This option is also subject to the availability and willingness of the instructor offering the course. Such an option will be available to students with a CPI of 8.5 or more to the extent of a maximum of one course per semester in the third and subsequent years, on the recommendation of the faculty adviser/project guide, PUGC, and approval of SUGC. This option is called ‘Guided Study' to distinguish it from the existing self-study mode, which is largely meant for students to clear backlogs in the curriculum. Further, even in respect of these courses, the rules that govern overloading apply strictly. The guided study option may be used on a case-by-case basis with prior approval from SUGC. The registration, examination, etc. will be similar to a self-study course. The evaluation for guided study will be done in the same way as for normal semester courses (i.e., 50% for in-semester performance and 50% for end-semester performance). This option will also be made available in the following special situations, provided the CPI requirement is fulfilled: (a) students who miss the ‘Departmental Introductory Course' due to a change of branch obtained at the end of the year. (b) Students dropping an entire semester due to medical reasons (5.4). Repeating a course A student is required to repeat a course completely in the following situations: i) when he gets an FR, NP, or DX grade in a course. ii) A student with an FF grade in a course can avail only 50% marks for re-examination in that course immediately after the end-of-semester examination. If a student fails the re-examination or does not appear for the re-examination for any reason, they will be awarded an FR grade, and in that case, they have to re-register (repeat) the course. iii) When a student who gets an ‘II' grade fails to apply or does not appear for a re-examination giving valid medical reasons for absence at the end-of-semester examination, the grade DR is awarded automatically to such a course. iv) When a student who gets an “II” grade and subsequently becomes eligible for re-examination does not appear on the scheduled date, for any non-medical reason, the grade ‘II' is automatically converted into an FR grade. v) Students are permitted to overload on account of a backlog laboratory/drawing course only up to 3 credits during a regular semester where the course is being offered with prior permission of the SUGC, provided there is no clash in the SLOs. 5.5 Course Substitution Normally, substitution of one course (in which one obtains an FR/DX grade) by another is discouraged. However, substitution may be permitted in the cases of FR, DX, and DR in the same group of courses as given in the courses of the study bulletin, subject to the following conditions: if it is a core or compulsory course, there will be no substitution, and the same course must be repeated. 5.6.1 In the case of FR or DX in an institute elective course, it may be substituted by another institute elective only. 5.6.2 If it is a departmental elective, it may be substituted by another departmental elective course from the same group. 5.7 Overloading of Courses: Students with a CPI of 8.5 or above (irrespective of any backlogs) may be permitted to take 1 course per semester as an overload, provided the timetable permits. There shall be no relaxation of the CPI criterion. A change of status from credit to audit with respect to such courses may be allowed up to the mid-semester examination. This should, however, be with the prior approval of the SUGC. However, the students may be allowed to overload a course in the regular semester from the fifth semester onwards to clear backlog course(s) with prior approval of the SUGC, subject to a minimum CPI of 6.5 and time-table slot availability. There shall be no further relaxation of CPI criteria. 5.8 Self-Study: To enable a student to complete the course credit requirements at the end of the year for B. A student with a backlog of only one or two courses may take self-study courses after obtaining the necessary approval from SUGC. An application for self-study has to be made to SUGC in the prescribed form, which should be signed by the supervising teacher, who may examine him from time to time, apart from an exam at the end of the course. The duration of the self-study course is between 8 and 10 weeks. The course should be completed and the grade B obtained in the semester in which the registration is done. There is no carryover of the self-study course from one semester to another. The SUGC will consider each application for self-study on its merits and will restrict the total number of such courses to only two during the entire program of a student. The credits for a self-study course are the same as those for the regular course and will be taken into account while calculating the total credits in a semester, which should not exceed the normal load. These courses are subject to the availability and willingness of concerned faculty members. Opportunities for clearing backlogs may become available through summer courses and by running courses in unscheduled semesters. However, for the self-study option, the following directives will be followed: (a) The self-study option will strictly be restricted to B.Tech. students in the summer of the final year and for a maximum of two courses. (b) The restriction on students with a FR or DX grade in a subject not being eligible for the self-study option for that course may be waived by the departments if only two courses are remaining for completion of the degree. Otherwise, instructors or departments may insist that the concerned students repeat the course in a later regular semester without taking a course as self-study. (c) Academic standards must be rigorously maintained in the self-study mode. A request for the self-study option must be in the prescribed form available in the academic office. (d) The registration, examination, etc. will be as per the academic calendar. The evaluation of self-study will be done in a similar way as it is for a normal semester course. (i.e., 50% for in-semester performance and 50% for end-semester performance) 5.9 Summer Courses The summer course facility provides the opportunity for the students to clear their backlogs by re-doing courses with adequate rigor, provided it is offered. A minimum of five students should register for a course, and the faculty concerned should also agree to run the course in the summer. A student is never permitted to register for more than 18 credits during any one summer term. Students are also not permitted to re-register for courses for which they have already obtained a pass grade, or PP. To be discussed, the registration, examination, etc. will be as per the academic calendar, and the evaluation will be done in the same way as for normal semester courses (i.e., 50% for in-semester performance and 50% for end-semester performance). 5.10 Change of Branch: Students are eligible to apply for a change of branch or program after completing the first two semesters. The following rules and guidelines are used for considering their applications for change: 1. Registered students will be permitted to apply for a change of branch without any constraints. 2. For others, change will be permitted strictly on a merit basis. Students without fail grades and backlogs and with CPI ≥ 6.5 will be eligible to apply and can make their choices. 3. The request for change (in the order of merit) for student S1 from department A to department B will be considered if (a) the strength of department B does not exceed sanctioned strength. (b) The number of students on roll in Department A does not fall below 85% of the sanctioned strength. (c) The request of S1 will be re-considered (again in the order of merit) if S1 does not violate (b) above due to another student getting transferred to Department A. 4. If student S1 is not permitted to change from department A to B (due to (b) above), any other student S2 with a CPI less than S1 will also not be permitted to change to department B. 5. The requests for a change of branch or program from students belonging to the SC/ST category may be considered special cases by the Chairman of the Senate on merit. 6. All such transfers can be effected only once at the beginning of the second academic year. No application for a change of branch or program during the subsequent academic years will be entertained. To be discussed with Prof. Biswas: 6 Seminars and Projects The project is a course requirement wherein, under the guidance of a faculty member, a final-year student is required to do some innovative work with the application of knowledge earned while undergoing various courses and labs. in the earlier years. The student is expected to do a literature survey and carry out development and/or experimentation. Through the project work, the student has to exhibit both analytical and practical skills. The student will have to do their project under the guidance of a faculty member from the same department unless specifically permitted by the department coordinator or faculty advisor for alternate arrangements. The project for B. Tech is specifically structured. The B.Tech. project is done in the final year and divided into two stages. Normally, the first stage is done in the autumn semester and the second stage in the subsequent spring semester. The project carries an aggregate of 20 credits (stage 5 and stage 15). Every student has to undertake seminars or projects of professional interest as per the requirements of the department. These may be related to theoretical analysis, an experimental investigation, a prototype design, a new correlation and analysis of data, the fabrication and setup of new equipment, or a combination of some of these. The final project report should be submitted by the prescribed date, usually three weeks before the end of the final semester. The report is evaluated by a panel of examiners consisting of the chairman, external examiner, internal examiner, guide, and co-guide, wherever applicable, and an oral examination is conducted after the semester-end examination. The assessment of the project work is done on the following basis: the preliminary presentation (1st stage) carries 25% of the total weightage. Another 25% weight is given for the initiative, interest, effort, and regularity shown by the student during the project work. The remaining 50% weight is assigned to the oral examination conducted by the Panel of Examiners. Program-wise details are outlined below: 6.1 B.Tech. Project (a): To avoid problems in scheduling various assessments that require presentations by students towards the end of the semester in respect of the seminar or project (i). Topic will be given by the end of the previous semester, and (ii) evaluation will be carried out by the department as per convenience, after allowing for a minimum of 10 weeks of work during the semester. (b) Issues relating to project evaluation: The rules for seminar/project evaluation are as detailed below: i. Each stage will be evaluated separately and graded. ii. The guide will ensure that the work carried out by the student is adequate before giving approval for the submission of the project report for evaluation. iii. The guide may award an ‘XX' grade (at least 1 month in advance of stage evaluation) in case the student has been irregular in interactions and work (a student is expected to have at least one meeting every week with the guide). iv. In special situations (such as prolonged health problems or delays in getting facilities), the guide may recommend to SUGC (through PUGC) an extension of a maximum of one month for submission and evaluation without any grade penalty. v. The examination panel consisting of the chairman, internal examiner, guide, and co-guide may award a fail grade (FF or FR) for poor performance and/or inadequate work. In the case of an FF, the student can appear again after 1 month by submitting a fresh report; in this case, the maximum possible grade will be restricted to DD, as in the case of courses. vi. The student will be required to register a fresh for the stage in cases of DX and FR grades. In the case of FR grade, summer registration may be permitted by SUGC on a case-by-case basis, on the justified recommendation of PUGC. However, registration during the summer is not permissible in the case of DX. vii. An II grade may be awarded if the student misses the evaluation on medical grounds, in which case a re-examination will be held within 1 month. viii. In cases of delayed project submission other than those in (iv) above, the maximum permissible grade is BC ix. ‘Students who do not drop the project in time and do not submit the project report for assessment by the due date will be temporarily awarded ‘II' grade at the time of finalization of grades for all the other students. The ‘II' grade will be converted to a performance grade not higher than BC when these students submit their reports, though late, and undergo the oral examination. Thus, students submitting their project reports late will only be entitled to the grades BC, CC, CD, DD, and FF after the oral assessment. Further, if such late reports are not submitted within a reasonable period of time (by the end of the summer semester), the ‘II' grade will be automatically converted to ‘FF'. 7. Internship: In order to enhance the industry-academic partnership and improve placement opportunities at IIT Goa, students have to visit an industry or research lab for a duration of six months. The 6-month internship will be offered to the students based on departmental recommendations. The course work can be adjusted accordingly so that the 7th semester is made available for the students to avail of a 6-month internship in an industry or a research lab. Those who are not interested in an industrial internship and those who did not receive any internships will work on an academic project at the institute. In order to ensure the scientific quality of internships and facilitate uniform hiring, an internship advisory committee will be formed for each department. During the selection process itself, the companies are expected to provide details of the project as well as the duties of the student so that the committee can evaluate the quality of the proposed work. After being selected, a guide from both IIT Goa and industry will be allotted. The faculty guide will interact with the industry counterparts to continuously monitor progress. At the end of the internship period, each student must submit a project report and make a presentation to the department-specific evaluation committee. Grades will be given based on the quality report and presentation as well as on the feedback from the supervisor from the industry. 8.0 Performance Requirements 8.1 Award of Degree: B.Tech. A degree in the relevant branch of engineering or in a relevant branch of engineering will be conferred on a student in a convocation. However, for the conferment of a degree, the student has to fulfill the following requirements: a) The student should have taken and passed all the prescribed courses under the general institutional and departmental requirements. b) The student should have satisfactorily fulfilled other academic requirements like practical training, NSO, work visits, semi-nar, and the project. c) The student should have paid all the institute dues. d) The student should have no case of indiscipline against him or her. Although CPI will be given in the semester grade reports, the final degree certificate will not mention any class whatsoever. 8.2 Award of Medals Various medals are awarded to the outstanding students from among the graduates who receive their degree at the annual convocation of the Institute. The President of India Medal, or the Institute Gold Medal, is awarded to the most outstanding student in the undergraduate program (B.Tech.) admitted through JEE. (Conditions and procedures as approved by the Senate from time to time apply.) The Institute Silver Medal is awarded to the most outstanding graduate in each branch of engineering other than the one to which the recipient of the President of India Medal and the Institute Gold Medal belongs. Only such students who have completed the program without dropping or failing in any of the minimum credit-carrying courses are considered eligible for the award of medals. 8.3 Minimum Semester Performance There shall be no minimum CPI requirement for the award of the B. Tech, but the eligibility for awarding degrees to students with a CPI less than 5.00 would have to be approved by the Chairman, Senate. However, such cases will be reported to the Senate. 8.4 Slow track option For students with up to four backlogs (FR/DX) at the end of first and second years, a separate slow-track program should be worked out by the faculty adviser and approved by SUGC to enable him/her to complete the degree requirements over a longer-than-normal duration (considering the maximum duration indicated in 8.5). The performance of such students should be monitored on a semester basis, and the necessary corrections to the program as warranted should be made from time to time. Students with FR/DX grades (in up to four courses) are advised to opt for the slow-track option in their own interest, in consultation with their faculty advisers. Otherwise, they will be at risk of early termination if more backlogs accumulate. 8.5 Residency Requirements (Maximum Period for Completion of Program) In any case, a student should fulfill the requirements for their respective degree within the maximum period specified for the program as given below, including withdrawal in exceptional circumstances, failing which their case will be referred to the Senate for dismissal: B.Tech. Programme: Twelve Semesters (Six Years) 8.6 Termination Criteria The academic performance of each UG student is reviewed by the SUGC/SPGC at the end of each regular semester, as the students of IIT Goa are always expected to maintain at least a minimum level of performance. A deficient student may be placed on academic probation or warned, or their academic program may be terminated as per the rules in place. The criteria for placing students on warning, academic probation, and program termination are as follows: for the registered students till date, let ‘P’ be the total number of credits the student required to be completed till the last semester, starting from the first semester; ‘Q’ be the total number of credits the student has earned in the preceding semesters; ‘R’ be the total number of credits the student has registered in the last semester; and ‘S’ be the total number of credits the student has earned in the last semester. Then, a student will be placed on an academic probation or warning in the next semester if either or both of the following conditions are satisfied: Condition I: 𝑄≤ 2 3 PCondition II:: 𝑆≤0.5 R A student on warning or academic probation is required to sign an undertaking incorporating the following conditions: a) She/he shall register with higher priority for those courses (or their substitute) in which grade FR/DX is obtaine. b) She or he shall not hold any office in the Hall of Residence, the Student Gymkhana, or any other organization or body. c) Any other terms and conditions laid down by the SUGC or Senate. d) The parents or guardians of these students are required to countersign this undertaking. If a student is unable to meet these terms and conditions due to some genuine reason, she or he must explain this to the PUGC or FC before the semester ends. If a student already on academic probation or warning satisfies either or both of the above-mentioned conditions at the end of the current semester, then the academic program of the student will be terminated. Appeal Against Termination A student whose program is terminated may appeal to the Chairman, Senate, for reinstatement in the ram. In case of termination due to inadequate academic performance, the student should clearly explain the reason(s) for poor performance, including how those reason(s) will not adversely affect her or his performance in the future. The Senate shall take a final decision after considering all available inputs. A student may reappeal even after a previous appeal has been rejected. However, the Senate may not entertain any re-appeal for review unless substantial additional information is brought to its attention. 9. Miscellaneous 9.1: Helping weaker students: Students with backlogs will be compulsorily required to register manually. This will require them to meet and discuss this with the faculty adviser. The students with backlogs should continuously seek help from the faculty adviser, the student counselor, and also be in constant touch with their parents about their performance. The Institute will also communicate with the parents and guardians about the performance of their ward semester-wise or annually. This is with the intention that the guardians of the students with backlogs should be made aware of the performance of their wards, and it is expected that they should keep in constant touch with the faculty adviser, the concerned Head of the Department, and if necessary, the student's counselor. 9.2 Faculty Adviser On joining the institute, a student or a group of students is/are assigned to a Faculty Adviser. The students are expected to consult the faculty adviser on many matters relating to their academic performance and the courses they may take in various semesters or summer terms. The idea of a faculty adviser has evolved to extend guidance to the students, enabling them to complete their courses of study for the required degree in a smooth and satisfactory manner. Thus, the role of the faculty adviser is of immense importance. The faculty adviser is the person whom parents or guardians should contact for performance-related issues in their ward. In view of the guidance given to the students, the role of the faculty adviser is outlined as below: 1. Guidance about the rules and regulations governing the courses of study for a particular degree. 2. The faculty adviser registers the students for courses within the scope of the advice given by the Senate Undergraduate Committee (SUGC). 3. He is also authorized to permit the students to drop or adjust one or more courses for which they may have registered. 4. Pay special attention to weak students. Make a revised (unloading or uploading) plan of study for weak or bright students based on their semester performance. 6. Suggest modalities for courses and credit requirements for the students recommended for exchange programs. 7. Guidance and liaison with the parents of students for their performances 9.3 Academic Calendar The academic activities of the institute are regulated by an academic calendar approved by the Senate from time to time and made available to the students, faculty members, and all others concerned in print and/or electronic form. It is mandatory for students and faculty to strictly adhere to the academic calendar for the completion of academic activities. 10. Glossary:  PUGC: Programme Undergraduate Committee  SUGC: Senate Undergraduate Committee  CRF: Cour se Registration Form  CAF: Course Adjustment Form  FA: Faculty Adviser  Course List: List of students registered for a course  Semester: Approximately of 16 weeks’ duration each, the first one (Autumn Semester) from the last week of July to the last week of November and the second one (Spring Semester) from the first week of January to the last week of April.  Summer Term: approximately 8 weeks’ duration from the first week of May to the first week of July, mainly to facilitate students clearing of the backlog of lecture and laboratory courses, if any.  Course Credit (C): weighted sum of the number of lecture hours (L), tutorial hours (T), and practical hours (P) associated with the course.  Registration: The total of course credits for which the student has registered during a semester.  Semester Credits: The sum of credits for courses registered by the student in a semester.  Credits Earned: The sum of course credits for credit courses in which a student has passed in a semester.  Grade: a qualitative assessment of the student's performance in a course indicated by the letters AP, AA, A, B, BB, BC, CC, CD, DD, FF, FR, DX, II, PP, or NP. DX or FR indicates that the student has to repeat the course. DR indicates the course was dropped.  Grade point: Number equivalent of the letter grades given by 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, corresponding to AP and AA, AB, BB, BC, CC, CD, and DD, respectively. FF, FR, and DX carry zero grade points; II, PP, and NP do not carry any grade points.  Instructor: A member of the faculty who teaches courses or labs.  Poor: Less than 30% in the in-semester performance.  Very Poor: Less than 20% in the in-semester performance.  Semester Grade Points: The sum of the products of credits and grade points for each course registered by a student in a semester.  SPI: Semester Performance Index, which is obtained by dividing the semester grade points by the semester credits.  Cumulative Credits: sum of the semester credits for all the semesters taken together, wherein the credits of a course are not counted if an alternative course has been taken in lieu of it.  Cumulative Grade Points: Sum of the Semester Grade Points for all the semesters taken together, wherein the credits of a course are not counted if an alternative course has been taken in lieu of it.  CPI: Cumulative Performance Index, which is obtained by dividing the cumulative grade points by the cumulative credits.